.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6-FDHOLDER-ERROR-CODES 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-fdholder-error-codes
.Nd error codes returned by the
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
daemon
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The following error messages (and corresponding
.Xr errno 3
codes) can be returned by the
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
daemon to its various clients.
This page explains why they occur.
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
.Ql Protocol error
.Po
.Dv EPROTO
.Pc
or
.Ql Protocol wrong type for socket
.Po
.Dv EPROTOTYPE
.Pc
.Pp
The client connected to the wrong kind of server and they cannot
communicate.
This is generally a programming error.
It can also signal a bug in the s6-fdholder tools, but protocol bugs
have usually been wiped out before an s6 release.
.It
.Ql Broken pipe
.Po
.Dv EPIPE
.Pc
.Pp
The client was not authorized to connect to the server, which closed
the connection.
You need to configure the access rights to the server.
.It
.Ql Operation not permitted
.Po
.Dv EPERM
.Pc
.Pp
Even though the client was authorized to connect to the server, the
specific operation it wanted to perform was denied.
You need to configure the access rights to the server.
.It
.Ql Too many open files in system
.Po
.Dv ENFILE
.Pc
.Pp
The client attempted to store more file descriptors than the server
can hold.
Or, the client attempted to retrieve more file descriptors than it can
hold.
You should check the
.Fl n
option to
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8 ,
as well as the
.Dv RLIMIT_NOFILE Ns [1]
resource limits used by the client and the server, and adjust them
accordingly.
.It
.Ql Resource busy
.Po
.Dv EBUSY
.Pc
.Pp
The client attempted to store a descriptor under an identifier that is
already used.
.It
.Ql Filename too long
.Po
.Dv ENAMETOOLONG
.Pc
.Pp
The identifier provided by the client was too long.
.It
.Ql \&No such file or directory
.Po
.Dv ENOENT
.Pc
.Pp
The identifier provided by the client was not found in the server
database.
.It
.Ql Bad file descriptor
.Po
.Dv EBADF
.Pc
.Pp
The client attempted to transmit a closed, or otherwise unsuitable for
fd-passing, file descriptor.
.It
.Ql Operation timed out
.Po
.Dv ETIMEDOUT
.Pc
.Pp
The client, or the server, took too long to perform the wanted
operation.
This is most probably a programming error, because both client and
server should have a very fast reaction time.
Check that the client is connecting to the right server, and check
.Fl t
options to both client and server (the argument is interpreted as
milliseconds!).
.El
.Pp
Other errors indicate a transient error such as lack of memory,
hardware failure, etc.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-fdholder-daemon 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-delete 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-getdump 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-list 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-retrieve 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-setdump 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-store 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-transferdump 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
.Pp
[1]
.Lk https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/basedefs/sys_resource.h.html
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-fdholder-errorcodes.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
