.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6-FTRIGW 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-ftrigw
.Nd API for notifiers, i.e. programs that want to regularly announce what they're doing
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Notifiers should create an
.Xr s6-fifodir 7
in a hardcoded place in the filesystem, and document its
location.
Listeners will then be able to subscribe to that
.Xr s6-fifodir 7 ,
and receive the events.
.Pp
Check the
.Pa s6/ftrigw.h
header for the exact function prototypes.
.Ss Creating a fifodir
.Bd -literal -offset indent
char const *path = "/var/lib/myservice/fifodir" ;
gid_t gid = -1 ;
int forceperms = 0 ;
int r = ftrigw_fifodir_make(path, gid, forceperms) ;
.Ed
.Pp
.Fn ftrigw_fifodir_make
creates an
.Xr s6-fifodir 7
at the
.Va path
location.
It returns 0, and sets errno, if an error occurs.
It returns 1 if it succeeds.
.Pp
If an
.Xr s6-fifodir 7 ,
owned by the user, already exists at
.Va path ,
and
.Va forceperms
is zero, then
.Fn ftrigw_fifodir_make
immediately returns success.
If
.Va forceperms
is nonzero, then it tries to adjust
.Va path
.Ap s
permissions before returning.
.Pp
If
.Va gid
is negative, then
.Va path
is created
.Dq public .
Any listener will be able to subscribe to
.Va path .
If
.Va gid
is nonnegative, then
.Va path
is created
.Dq private .
Only processes belonging to group
.Va gid
will be able to subscribe to
.Va path .
.Ss Sending an event
.Bd -literal -offset indent
char event = 'a' ;
r = ftrigw_notify(path, event) ;
.Ed
.Pp
.Fn ftrigw_notify
sends
.Va event
to all the processes that are currently subscribed to
.Va path .
It returns -1 if an error occurs, or the number of successfully
notified processes.
.Ss Cleaning up
When stray KILL signals hit
.Xr s6-ftrigrd 8
processes,
.Bl -enum -width x
.It
it's a sign of incorrect system administration,
.It
they can leave unused named pipes in the
.Xr s6-fifodir 7 .
.El
.Pp
It's the
.Xr s6-fifodir 7 Ap
s owner's job, i.e. the notifier's job, to periodically do some
housecleaning and remove those unused pipes.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
r = ftrigw_clean(path) ;
.Ed
.Pp
.Fn ftrigw_clean
cleans
.Va path .
It returns 0, and sets errno, if it encounters an error.
It returns 1 if it succeeds.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-accessrules 7 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder 7 ,
.Xr s6-ftrigr 7 ,
.Xr s6-libs6 7 ,
.Xr s6-s6lock 7
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/libs6/ftrigw.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
