.Dd February 19, 2023
.Dt S6-INSTANCED-SERVICE 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-instanced-service
.Nd dynamic instantiation
.Sh DESCRIPTION
An
.Em instanced service
is a parameterized service that you want to run several copies of,
with only the parameter changing.
Each copy of the service is called an
.Em instance .
.Pp
With s6, an
.Xr s6-service-directory 7
can only handle one process at a time.
So, if we want instanced services, there will have to be one service
directory per instance, always.
.Pp
.Em Static instantiation
means that the set of possible instances is finite and known in
advance.
With s6, it means that all the service directories for all possible
instances are created, typically by a preprocessor, and instances are
treated like regular services.
.Pp
.Em Dynamic instantiation
means that instances are created on demand instead of preallocated.
Starting with version 2.11.2.0, s6 provides a few tools to help users
set up and manage dynamically instanced services.
.Ss How to make a dynamically instanced service under s6
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
Write a template for a service directory that would run under
.Xr s6-supervise 8 .
The
.Pa run
script should take the name of the instance as its first argument; the
.Pa finish
script, if present, should take the name of the instance as its third
argument.
.It
Call the
.Xr s6-instance-maker 8
program with this template as first argument, and a path
.Pa dir
as second argument.
.Xr s6-instance-maker 8
will create a service directory in
.Pa dir .
This is an offline tool: it does not interact with any currently
active services or supervision trees.
.It
Supervise
.Pa dir
by adding it to your regular
.Xr s6-scan-directory 7 .
This will be your instanced service, but it's not running any instances yet.
It is, instead, a nested supervision tree - the instanced service is an
.Xr s6-svscan 8
process that will supervise all the instances.
.It
Create and delete instances at will with the
.Xr s6-instance-create 8
and
.Xr s6-instance-delete 8
programs; you can list all the available instances with
.Xr s6-instance-list 8 .
These tools are
.Em online :
they work with live service directories, i.e. that are being supervised by
.Xr s6-supervise 8 .
.It
Instances are regular supervised processes.
You can control individual instances with
.Xr s6-instance-control 8 ,
and check their status with
.Xr s6-instance-status 8 .
These tools are online as well.
.El
.Ss Internal workings
This section is not normative; users should not rely on it.
It is only here for informational purposes.
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
The service directory created by
.Xr s6-instance-maker 8
has three specifics subdirectories in it:
.Pa instance
and
.Pa instances ,
which are initially empty, and
.Pa template ,
storing the template service directory.
.It
When the service is active, there is an
.Xr s6-svscan 8
process running on
.Pa instance .
.It
.Xr s6-instance-create 8
makes a copy of
.Pa template
into
.Pa instances/ Ns Ar name ,
and
.Xr s6-svlink 8 Ns
s
.Pa instances/ Ns Ar name
to
.Pa instance .
When it returns, there is an
.Xr s6-supervise 8
process running on
.Pa instance/ Ns Ar name ,
and the instance may be up or not depending on the given options.
.It
.Xr s6-instance-control 8
is syntactic sugar around
.Xr s6-svc 8
on
.Pa instance/ Ns Ar name .
.It
.Xr s6-instance-status 8
is syntactic sugar around
.Xr s6-svstat 8
on
.Pa instance/ Ns Ar name .
.It
.Xr s6-instance-delete 8
is syntactic sugar around
.Xr s6-svunlink 8
on
.Pa instance/ Ns Ar name .
.It
.Xr s6-instance-list 8
is roughly equivalent to
.Ql ls -1 instance .
.El
.Ss Notes
This implementation of dynamic instances may seem expensive: it
creates one
.Xr s6-svscan 8
process per instanced service, and one
.Xr s6-supervise 8
process per instance.
However, remember that these processes use very little private memory,
so having additional copies of them is far less expensive than it
looks.
It's really a convenient way to implement the feature by reusing
existing code.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-instance-control 8 ,
.Xr s6-instance-create 8 ,
.Xr s6-instance-delete 8 ,
.Xr s6-instance-list 8 ,
.Xr s6-instance-maker 8 ,
.Xr s6-instance-status 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
