.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6-LIBS6 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-libs6
.Nd collection of utility C interfaces, used in the s6 executables
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Ss Compiling
Make sure the s6 headers, as well as the skalibs headers, are visible
in your header search path.
.Pp
Use
.Ql #include <s6/s6.h> .
.Ss Linking
Make sure the s6 libraries, as well as the skalibs libraries, are
visible in your library search path.
.Pp
Link against
.Ql -ls6
and
.Ql -lskarnet .
If you're using socket functions (which is the case with
.Xr s6-ftrigr 7 ,
for instance), add
.Ql `cat $sysdeps/socket.lib`
to your command line.
If you're using timed functions involving TAI timestamps (which is
also the case with
.Xr s6-ftrigr 7 ,
for instance), add
.Ql `cat $sysdeps/sysclock.lib` .
.Qq $sysdeps
stands for your skalibs sysdeps directory.
.Ss Programming
The
.Pa s6/s6.h
header is actually a concatenation of other headers: libs6 is
separated into several modules, each of them with its own header.
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
The
.Pa s6/accessrules.h
header provides functions to check credentials against configuration
files.
Refer to
.Xr s6-accessrules 7 .
.It
The
.Pa s6/ftrigr.h
header provides functions to subscribe to
.Xr s6-fifodir 7 Ns s
and be notified of events.
Refer to
.Xr s6-ftrigr 7 .
.It
The
.Pa s6/ftrigw.h
header provides functions to manage
.Xr s6-fifodir 7 Ns s
and send notifications to them.
Refer to
.Xr s6-ftrigw 7 .
.It
The
.Pa s6/s6lock.h
header provides functions to acquire locks with a timeout.
Refer to
.Xr s6-s6lock 7 .
.It
The
.Pa s6/s6-fdholder.h
header provides functions to communicate with an
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
server and exchange file descriptors with it.
Refer to
.Xr s6-fdholder 7 .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-accessrules 7 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder 7 ,
.Xr s6-ftrigr 7 ,
.Xr s6-ftrigw 7 ,
.Xr s6-s6lock 7
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/libs6/
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
