.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6-SCAN-DIRECTORY 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-scan-directory
.Nd directory containing a list of service directories, or symbolic links pointing to service directories
.Sh DESCRIPTION
A
.Em scan directory
represents a list of services that are supposed to be
supervised.
Running
.Xr s6-svscan 8
on this scan directory launches a
.Em supervision tree :
every service listed in the scan directory will be supervised.
.Pp
There is normally only one scan directory per system, although nothing
prevents a system administrator from having more. daemontools[1]
traditionally uses
.Pa /service ,
and runit[2] traditionally uses
.Pa /etc/service .
s6 does not care where your scan directory is, but I would advise
.Pa /service
for compatibility with daemontools.
Depending on your installation,
.Pa /service
could be a symbolic link and point to a place either in a RAM
filesystem or in
.Pa /var .
.Ss Where and how to build a scan directory
Opinions and practices differ.
.Pp
It is generally accepted that the place where you store all your
service directories (your
.Dq service repository )
should not be used as a scan directory - for a simple reason: you
might want to have service directories for more services than what you
want to start at any given time.
In other words, your scan directory will be a subset of your service
repository, so you cannot just run
.Xr s6-svscan 8
on every service you have a service directory for.
So, the first thing is to separate your service repository, which is
just a storage place for all the services you might want to manage
someday, and your scan directory, which is a directory representing
all the services that you are currently managing.
.Ss SERVICE REPOSITORY
Where to store your service repository is purely a matter of personal
preference.
You just have to be aware that
.Xr s6-supervise 8
needs writable
.Pa supervise
and
.Pa event
subdirectories in a service directory it monitors.
.Ss SCAN DIRECTORY
Where and how to build your scan directory depends heavily on your
boot system - and on your personal preference too.
.Pp
Standard daemontools[1] and runit[2] installations like to have a
fixed scan directory containing symlinks to service directories
located in the service repository.
In other words, the service repository contains the real working
copies of the service directories.
This works, as long as:
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
It is possible to create writable
.Pa supervise
and
.Pa event
subdirectories in every managed service directory.
This can be achieved for instance via symlinks, or by having the
service repository stored on a writable filesystem.
.It
The scan program
.Po
.Xr s6-svscan 8 ,
svscan,
.Xr runsvdir 8 ...
.Pc
is started late enough for all the necessary filesystems to be mounted.
.El
.Pp
My own recommendation would be to have working copies of the service
directories entirely separate from the service repository.
The service repository can be safely stored on the root filesystem,
and the needed directories copied to a RAM filesystem at boot
time.
The scan directory can be either the place where the working copies
are written, or another directory containing symlinks to those working
copies. (The latter is useful if you are using the
.Fl t
option to
.Xr s6-svscan 8
with a nonzero argument: copying a directory is not atomic, but making
a symlink is, so there is no risk of your scanner finding a directory
while it is being copied - which could result in
.Xr s6-supervise 8
getting the wrong information and not managing the service properly.)
.Pp
An example:
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
Have your service repository in
.Pa /img/services ,
i.e. have service directories in
.Pa /img/services/ftpd ,
.Pa /img/services/httpd ,
.Pa /img/services/sshd ,
etc.
.It
When booting, make
.Pa /tmp
a RAM filesystem, and create the directories
.Pa /tmp/services
and
.Pa /tmp/service .
.It
Have
.Xr s6-svscan 8
run on
.Pa /tmp/service ,
as early as possible in your boot sequence.
This is possible whether you want to run
.Xr s6-svscan 8
as process 1[3] or not[4].
.It
During the boot sequence, populate
.Pa /tmp/services
with copies of the service directories you need: for instance,
.Bd -literal -offset indent
cp -a /img/services/sshd /tmp/services/sshd
cp -a /img/services/ftpd /tmp/services/ftpd
etc.
.Ed
.It
When you are ready to start a service, make a symlink in the
.Pa /tmp/service
scan directory pointing to the working copy of the
.Xr s6-service-directory 7
you need in
.Pa /tmp/services ,
then notify
.Xr s6-svscan 8 .
For instance, to start ftpd and httpd together:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ln -s ../services/ftpd /tmp/service
ln -s ../services/httpd /tmp/service
s6-svscanctl -a /tmp/service
.Ed
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-fifodir 7 ,
.Xr s6-service-directory 7
.Pp
[1]
.Lk https://cr.yp.to/daemontools.html
.Pp
[2]
.Lk http://smarden.org/runit/
.Pp
[3]
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-svscan-1.html
.Pp
[4]
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-svscan-not-1.html
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/scandir.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
