.Dd January 15, 2023
.Dt S6-SERVICE-DIRECTORY 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-service-directory
.Nd directory containing all the information related to a service, i.e. a long-running process maintained and supervised by
.Xr s6-supervise 8
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Strictly speaking, a
.Em service
is not always equivalent to a long-running process.
Things like Ethernet interfaces fit the definition of
.Em services
one may want to supervise; however, s6 does not
provide
.Em service supervision ;
it provides
.Em process supervision ,
and it is impractical to use the s6 architecture as is to supervise
services that are not equivalent to one long-running process.
However, we still use the terms
.Em service
and
.Em service directory
for historical and compatibility reasons.
.Ss Directory contents
A service directory foo may contain the following elements:
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
An executable file named
.Pa run .
It can be any executable file (such as a binary file or a link to any
other executable file), but most of the time it will be a script,
called
.Em run script .
This file is the most important one in your service directory: it
contains the commands that will setup and run your
.Em foo
service.
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
It is forked and executed by
.Xr s6-supervise 8
every time the service must be started, i.e. normally when
.Xr s6-supervise 8
starts, and whenever the service goes down when it is supposed to be
up.
.It
It is given one argument, which is the same argument that the
.Xr s6-supervise 8
process is running with, i.e. the name of the service directory
\(em
or, if
.Xr s6-supervise 8
is run under
.Xr s6-svscan 8 ,
the name of the service directory as seen by
.Xr s6-svscan 8
in its
.Xr s6-scan-directory 7 .
That is,
.Pa "" Ns Ar foo
or
.Pa "" Ns Ar foo Ns /log ,
if
.Ar foo
is the name of the
.Em symbolic link
in the scan directory.
.El
A run script should normally:
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
adjust redirections for stdin, stdout and stderr.
When a run script starts, it inherits its standard file descriptors
from
.Xr s6-supervise 8 ,
which itself inherits them from
.Xr s6-svscan 8 .
stdin is normally
.Pa /dev/null .
If
.Xr s6-svscan 8
was launched by another init system, stdout and stderr likely point to
that init system's default log (or
.Pa /dev/null
in the case of sysvinit).
If
.Xr s6-svscan 8
is running as pid 1 via the help of software like s6-linux-init[1],
then its stdout and stderr point to a catch-all logger, which catches
and logs any output of the supervision tree that has not been caught
by a dedicated logger.
If the defaults provided by your installation are not suitable for
your run script, then your run script should perform the proper
redirections before executing into the final daemon.
For instance, dedicated logging mechanisms, such as the
.Pa log
subdirectory (see below) or the s6-rc[2] pipeline feature, pipe your
run script's stdout to the logging service, but chances are you want
to log stderr as well, so the run script should make sure that its
stderr goes into the log pipe.
This is achieved by
.Ql fdmove -c 2 1
in execline[3], and
.Ql exec 2>&1
in shell[4].
.It
adjust the environment for your
.Em foo
daemon.
Normally the run script inherits its environment from
.Xr s6-supervise 8 ,
which normally inherits its environment from
.Xr s6-svscan 8 ,
which normally inherits a minimal environment from the boot
scripts.
Service-specific environment variables should be set in the run
script.
.It
adjust other parameters for the
.Em foo
daemon, such as its uid and gid.
Normally the supervision tree, i.e.
.Xr s6-svscan 8
and the various
.Xr s6-supervise 8
processes, is run as root, so run scripts are also run as root;
however, for security purposes, services should not run as root if
they don't need to.
You can use the
.Xr s6-setuidgid 8
utility in
.Pa foo/run
to lose privileges before executing into
.Em foo Ap
s long-lived process; or the
.Xr s6-envuidgid 8
utility if your long-lived process needs root privileges at start time
but can drop them afterwards.
.It
execute into the long-lived process that is to be supervised by
.Xr s6-supervise 8 ,
i.e. the real
.Em foo
daemon.
That process must not
.Dq background itself :
being run by a supervision tree already makes it a
.Dq background task.
.El
.It
An optional executable file named
.Pa finish .
Like
.Pa run ,
it can be any executable file.
This
.Em finish script ,
if present, is executed everytime the
.Pa run
script dies.
Generally, its main purpose is to clean up non-volatile data such as
the filesystem after the supervised process has been killed.
If the
.Em foo
service is supposed to be up,
.Pa foo/run
is restarted after
.Pa foo/finish
dies.
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
By default, a finish script must do its work and exit in less than 5
seconds; if it takes more than that, it is killed.
(The point is that the run script, not the finish script, should be
running; the finish script should really be short-lived.)
The maximum duration of a
.Pa finish
execution can be configured via the
.Pa timeout-finish
file, see below.
.It
The finish script is executed with three arguments:
.Bl -enum -width x
.It
the exit code from the run script (resp. 256 if the run script was
killed by a signal);
.It
an undefined number (resp. the number of the signal that killed the
run script);
.It
the name of the service directory, the same that has been given to
.Pa ./run .
.El
.It
If the finish script exits 125, then
.Xr s6-supervise 8
interprets this as a permanent failure for the service, and does not
restart it, as if an
.Ql s6-svc -O
command had been sent.
.It
If
.Xr s6-supervise 8
has been instructed to exit after the service dies, via an
.Ql s6-svc -x
command or a
.Dv SIGHUP ,
then the next invocation of
.Pa finish
will (obviously) be the last, and it will run with stdin and stdout
pointing to
.Pa /dev/null .
.El
.It
A directory named
.Pa supervise .
It is automatically created by
.Xr s6-supervise 8
if it does not exist.
This is where
.Xr s6-supervise 8
stores its internal information.
The directory must be writable.
.It
An optional, empty, regular file named
.Pa down .
If such a file exists, the default state of the service is considered
down, not up:
.Xr s6-supervise 8
will not automatically start it until it receives a
.Ql s6-svc -u
command.
If no
.Pa down
file exists, the default state of the service is up.
.It
An optional regular file named
.Pa notification-fd .
If such a file exists, it means that the service supports readiness
notification; refer to
.Xr s6-notifywhenup 7 .
The file must only contain an unsigned integer, which is the number of
the file descriptor that the service writes its readiness notification
to.
(For instance, it should be 1 if the daemon is
.Xr s6-ipcserverd 8
run with the
.Fl 1
option.)
When a service is started, or restarted, by
.Xr s6-supervise 8 ,
if this file exists and contains a valid descriptor number,
.Xr s6-supervise 8
will wait for the notification from the service and broadcast
readiness, i.e. any
.Ql s6-svwait -U ,
.Ql s6-svlisten1 -U
or
.Ql s6-svlisten -U
processes will be triggered.
.It
An optional regular file named
.Pa lock-fd .
If such a file exists, it must contain an unsigned integer,
representing a file descriptor that will be open in the service.
The service
.Em should not write to that descriptor
and
.Em should not close it .
In other words, it should totally ignore it.
That file descriptor holds a lock, that will naturally be released
when the service dies.
The point of this feature is to prevent
.Xr s6-supervise 8
from accidentally spawning several copies of the service in case
something goes wrong: for instance, the service backgrounds itself
(which it shouldn't do when running under a supervision suite), or
.Xr s6-supervise 8
is killed, restarted by
.Xr s6-svscan 8 ,
and attempts to start another copy of the service while the first copy
is still alive.
If
.Xr s6-supervise 8
detects that the lock is held when it tries to start the service, it
will print a warning message; the new service instance will block
until the lock is released, then proceed as usual.
.It
An optional regular file named
.Pa timeout-kill .
If such a file exists, it must only contain an unsigned integer
.Em t .
If
.Em t
is nonzero, then on receipt of an
.Ql s6-svc -d
command, which sends a SIGTERM (by default, see down-signal below) and
a SIGCONT to the service, a timeout of
.Em t
milliseconds is set; and if the service is still not dead after
.Em t
milliseconds, then it is sent a SIGKILL.
If
.Pa timeout-kill
does not exist, or contains 0 or an invalid value, then the service is
never forcibly killed (unless, of course, an
.Ql s6-svc -k
command is sent).
.It
An optional regular file named
.Pa timeout-finish .
If such a file exists, it must only contain an unsigned integer, which
is the number of milliseconds after which the
.Pa ./finish
script, if it exists, will be killed with a SIGKILL.
The default is 5000: finish scripts are killed if they're still alive
after 5 seconds.
A value of 0 allows finish scripts to run forever.
.It
An optional regular file named
.Pa max-death-tally .
If such a file exists, it must only contain an unsigned integer, which
is the maximum number of service death events that
.Xr s6-supervise 8
will keep track of.
If the service dies more than this number of times, the oldest events
will be forgotten.
Tracking death events is useful, for instance, when throttling service
restarts.
The value cannot be greater than 4096.
If the file does not exist, a default of 100 is used.
.It
An optional regular file named
.Pa down-signal .
If such a file exists, it must only contain the name or number of a
signal, followed by a newline.
This signal will be used to kill the supervised process when a
.Ql s6-svc -d
or
.Ql s6-svc -r
command is used.
If the file does not exist, SIGTERM will be used by default.
.It
A
.Xr s6-fifodir 7
named
.Pa event .
It is automatically created by
.Xr s6-supervise 8
if it does not exist.
.Pa "" Ns Ar foo Ns /event
is the rendez-vous point for listeners, where
.Xr s6-supervise 8
will send notifications when the service goes up or down.
.It
Optional directories named
.Pa instance
and
.Pa instances .
Those are internal subdirectories created by
.Xr s6-instance maker 8
in a templated service directory.
Outside of instanced services, these directories should never appear,
and you should never create them manually.
.It
An optional service directory named
.Pa log .
If it exists and
.Em foo
is in a
.Xr s6-scan-directory 7 ,
and
.Xr s6-svscan 8
runs on that scandir, then two services are monitored:
.Em foo
and
.Pa foo/log .
A pipe is open and maintained between
.Em foo
and
.Pa foo/log ,
i.e. everything that
.Pa foo/run
writes to its stdout will appear on
.Pa foo/log/run Ap
s stdin.
The
.Em foo
service is said to be logged; the
.Em foo/log
service is called
.Em foo Ap
s logger.
A logger service cannot be logged: if
.Pa foo/log/log
exists, nothing special happens.
.El
.Pp
.Sy Stability
.Pp
With the evolution of s6, it is possible that
.Xr s6-supervise 8
configuration uses more and more files in the service directory.
The
.Pa notification-fd
and
.Pa timeout-finish
files, for instance, have appeared in 2015; users who previously had
files with the same name had to change them.
There is no guarantee that
.Xr s6-supervise 8
will not use additional names in the service directory in the same
fashion in the future.
.Pp
There is, however, a guarantee that
.Xr s6-supervise 8
will never touch subdirectories named
.Pa data
or
.Pa env .
So if you need to store user information in the service directory with
the guarantee that it will never be mistaken for a configuration file,
no matter the version of s6, you should store that information in the
.Pa data
or
.Pa env
subdirectories of the service directory.
.Ss Where should I store my service directories?
Service directories describe the way services are launched.
Once they are designed, they have little reason to change on a given
machine.
They can theoretically reside on a read-only filesystem - for
instance, the root filesystem, to avoid problems with mounting
failures.
.Pp
However, two subdirectories - namely
.Pa supervise
and
.Pa event
- of every service directory need to be writable.
So it has to be a bit more complex.
Here are a few possibilities.
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
The laziest option: you're not using
.Xr s6-svscan 8
as process 1, you're only using it to start a collection of services,
and your booting process is already handled by another init
system.
Then you can just store your service directories and your
.Xr s6-scan-directory 7
on some read-write filesystem such as
.Pa /var ;
and you tell your init system to launch (and, if possible, maintain)
.Xr s6-svscan 8
on the scan directory after that filesystem is mounted.
.It
The almost-as-lazy option: just have the service directories on the
root filesystem.
Then your service directory collection is for instance in
.Pa /etc/services
and you have a
.Pa /service
.Xr s6-scan-directory 7
containing symlinks to that collection.
This is the easy setup, not requiring an external init system to mount
your filesystems - however, it requires your root filesystem to be
read-write, which is unacceptable if you are concerned with
reliability - if you are, for instance, designing an embedded
platform.
.It
Some people[5] like to have their service directories in a read-only
filesystem, with supervise symlinks pointing to various places in
writable filesystems.
This setup looks a bit complex to me: it requires careful handling of
the writable filesystems, with not much room for error if the
directory structure does not match the symlinks (which are then
dangling).
But it works.
.It
Service directories are usually small; most daemons store their
information elsewhere.
Even a complete set of service directories often amounts to less than
a megabyte of data - sometimes much less.
Knowing this, it makes sense to have an image of your service
directories in the (possibly read-only) root filesystem, and copy it
all to a
.Xr s6-scan-directory 7
located on a RAM filesystem that is mounted at boot time.
This is the setup I recommend, and the one used by the s6-rc[2] service
manager.
It has several advantages:
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
Your service directories reside on the root filesystem and are not
modified during the lifetime of the system.
If your root filesystem is read-only and you have a working set of
service directories, you have the guarantee that a reboot will set
your system in a working state.
.It
Every boot system requires an early writeable filesystem, and many
create it in RAM.
You can take advantage of this to copy your service directories early
and run
.Xr s6-svscan 8
early.
.It
No dangling symlinks or potential problems with unmounted filesystems:
this setup is robust.
A simple
.Ql /bin/cp -a
or
.Ql tar -x
is all it takes to get a working service infrastructure.
.It
You can make temporary modifications to your service directories
without affecting the main ones, safely stored on the disk.
Conversely, every boot ensures clean service directories - including
freshly created
.Pa supervise
and
.Pa event
subdirectories.
No stale files can make your system unstable.
.El
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
s6-envuidgid 1 ,
s6-ipcserverd 1 ,
s6-setuidgid 1 ,
s6-supervise 1 ,
s6-svscan 1 ,
s6-fifodir 7 ,
s6-notifywhenup 7 ,
s6-scan-directory 7
.Pp
[1]
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6-linux-init/
.Pp
[2]
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6-rc/
.Pp
[3]
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/execline/
.Pp
[4]
.Lk https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/utilities/sh.html
.Pp
[5]
.Lk https://code.dogmap.org/
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/servicedir.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
