.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6-S6LOCK 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-s6lock
.Nd C interface to timed locks
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Unix natively provides locks, but the locking primitives are
synchronous, so either they are unbounded in execution time or they
require polling.
.Nm
provides poll-free locks that can timeout during attempted
acquisition.
.Pp
Check the
.Pa s6/s6lock.h
header for the prototypes.
The functions documented here are often simplified macros, for
instance relying on the
.Dv STAMP
global variable to hold the current time.
Fully reentrant functions with more control options are usually
available.
.Pp
Given the nature of the
.Nm
library, it makes sense to use an
.Xr s6lockd 8
.Xr s6-local-service 7
concurrently accessed by several applications using such locks to gate
shared resources.
.Pp
If you're not using an
.Xr s6lockd 8
.Xr s6-local-service 7 ,
make sure your application is not disturbed by children it doesn't
know it has.
Using nonblocking waits, ignoring pids you don't know, and using a
self-pipe[1] if your application is built around an event loop, are good
programming practices.
.Ss Starting and ending a session
.Bd -literal -offset indent
s6lock_t a = S6LOCK_ZERO ;
tain_t deadline ;

tain_now_g() ;
tain_addsec_g(&deadline, 2)

char const *path = S6LOCK_IPCPATH ;
s6lock_start_g(&a, path, &deadline) ;
// char const *lockdir = "/tmp/lock" ;
// s6lock_startf_g(&a, lockdir, &deadline) ;
.Ed
.Pp
.Fn s6lock_start_g
starts a session by connecting to an
.Xr s6lockd 8
service listening on
.Va path .
The working directory is set by the administrator of the service.
.Pp
.Fn s6lock_startf_g
starts a session with an
.Xr s6lockd 8
process as a child, using
.Va lockdir
as its working directory.
.Pp
.Va a
is an
.Vt s6lock_t
structure that must be declared in the stack and initialized to
.Dv S6LOCK_ZERO .
If the session initialization fails, the function returns 0 and errno
is set; else the function returns 1.
.Pp
If the absolute time
.Va deadline
is reached and the function has not returned yet, it immediately
returns 0 with errno set to
.Dv ETIMEDOUT .
Only local interprocess communications are involved; unless your
system is heavily overloaded, the function should return
near-instantly.
One or two seconds of delay between the current time and
.Va deadline
should be enough: if the function takes more than that to return, then
there is a problem with the underlying processes.
.Pp
You can have more than one session open in parallel, by declaring
several distinct
.Vt s6lock_t
structures and calling
.Fn s6lock_startf_g
.Po
or
.Fn s6lock_start_g
.Pc
more than once.
However, one single session can handle virtually as many concurrent
locks as your application needs, so opening several sessions is only
useful if you need to acquire locks in various distinct lock
directories.
.Pp
.Dl s6lock_end(&a) ;
.Pp
.Fn s6lock_end
frees all the resources used by the session.
The
.Va a
structure is then reusable for another session.
.Ss Acquiring and releasing locks
.Bd -literal -offset indent
uint16_t id ;
char const *file = "lockfile" ;
tain_t limit ;
tain_t deadline ;

int r = s6lock_acquire_sh_g (&a, &id, file, &limit, &deadline) ;
/* int r = s6lock_acquire_ex_g (&a, &id, file, &limit, &deadline) ; */
r = s6lock_release_g(&a, id, &deadline) ;
.Ed
.Pp
.Fn s6lock_acquire_sh_g
instructs the
.Xr s6lockd 8
daemon, related to the open session represented by the
.Va a
handle, to try and acquire a shared lock on the
.Va file
file located under that daemon's working directory
.Po
typically
.Pa /var/lock
.Pc .
.Va file
will be interpreted as relative to the daemon's working directory even
if it starts with a slash; however, slashes in the middle of
.Va file
are likely to result in an error.
.Pp
.Va limit
and
.Va deadline
are two absolute dates.
.Va deadline
is a deadline for the execution of the function: if by
.Va deadline
the function has not returned, then it instantly returns 0 and sets
errno to
.Dv ETIMEDOUT .
The function is normally near-instantaneous, so
.Va deadline
can be very close in the future and serves only as a protection
against malicious servers.
.Va limit
is the acquisition deadline: if by
.Va limit
the daemon still has not been able to acquire a lock on
.Va file ,
then it will report a timeout to the client.
.Pp
The function returns 1 in case of success, or 0 if an error occurs,
with errno set to a suitable value.
If it succeeds, then a 16-bit number is stored into
.Va *id ;
this number serves as an identifier for this lock.
.Pp
.Fn s6lock_acquire_ex_g
works just like
.Fn s6lock_acquire_sh_g ,
except that the daemon tries to acquire an exclusive lock.
.Pp
.Fn s6lock_release_g
releases the lock identified by
.Va id .
It normally returns 1.
It can return 0 with errno set to a suitable value if it fails.
.Va id
is not valid after the corresponding lock has been released.
The function normally returns instantly, with
.Va deadline
as a safeguard.
.Ss Asynchronously waiting for locks
.Em (From now on, the functions are listed with their prototypes instead of usage examples.)
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Ft int Fn s6lock_fd "s6lock_t const *a"
.Pp
Returns a file descriptor to select on for reading.
Do not
.Xr read 2
it though.
.It Ft int Fn s6lock_update "s6lock_t *a"
.Pp
Call this function whenever the fd checks readability: it will update
.Va a Ap
s internal structures with information from the
.Xr s6lockd 8
daemon.
It returns -1 if an error occurs; in case of success, it returns the
number of identifiers for which something happened.
.Pp
When
.Fn s6lock_update
returns,
.Ql genalloc_s(uint16_t, &a->list)
points to an array of
.Ql genalloc_len(uint16_t, &a->list)
16-bit unsigned integers.
Those integers are ids waiting to be passed to
.Fn s6lock_check .
.It Ft int Fn s6lock_check "s6lock_t *a" "uint16_t id" "char *what"
.Pp
Checks whether the lock identified by
.Va id
has been acquired.
Use after a call to
.Fn s6lock_update .
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
If an error occurred, returns -1 and sets errno.
The error number may have been transmitted from
.Xr s6lockd 8 .
.It
If the lock has not been acquired yet, returns 0.
.It
If the lock has been acquired, returns 1.
.El
.El
.Ss Synchronously waiting for locks
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Ft int Fn s6lock_wait_or_g "s6lock_t *a" "uint16_t const *idlist" "unsigned int n" "tain_t const *deadline"
.Pp
Synchronously waits for one of the locks represented by the array
pointed to by
.Va idlist
of length
.Va n
to be acquired.
Returns -1 if it fails, or a nonnegative number on success, which is
the index in
.Va idlist
of the acquired lock's id.
If no result has been obtained by
.Va deadline ,
the function returns -1
.Dv ETIMEDOUT .
.It Ft int Fn s6lock_wait_and_g "s6lock_t *a" "uint16_t const *idlist" "unsigned int n" "tain_t const *deadline"
.Pp
Synchronously waits for all of the locks represented by the array
pointed to by
.Va idlist
of length
.Va n
to be acquired.
Returns -1 if it fails and 0 if it succeeds.
If no result has been obtained by
.Va deadline ,
the function returns -1
.Dv ETIMEDOUT .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-accessrules 7 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder 7 ,
.Xr s6-ftrigr 7 ,
.Xr s6-ftrigw 7 ,
.Xr s6-libs6 7
.Pp
[1]
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/skalibs/libstddjb/selfpipe.html
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/libs6/s6lock.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
