.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6-ACCESSRULES-CDB-FROM-FS 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-accessrules-cdb-from-fs
.Nd compile a directory containing a ruleset suitable for
.Xr s6-ipcserver-access 8
or
.Xr s6-tcpserver-access 8
into a CDB[1] file
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Ar cdbfile
.Ar dir
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
compiles the
.Ar dir
directory containing a ruleset into a CDB[1] file
.Ar cdbfile
then exits 0.
.Ss Ruleset directory format
To be understood by
.Nm ,
.Xr s6-ipcserver-access 8 ,
or
.Xr s6-tcpserver-access 8 ,
.Ar dir
must have a specific format.
.Pp
.Ar dir
contains a series of directories:
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
.Pa ip4
for rules on IPv4 addresses.
.It
.Pa ip6
for rules on IPv6 addresses.
.It
.Pa reversedns
for rules on host names.
.It
.Pa uid
for rules on user IDs.
.It
.Pa gid
for rules on group IDs.
.El
.Pp
Depending on the application, other directories can appear in
.Ar dir
and be compiled into
.Ar cdbfile ,
but
.Xr s6-tcpserver-access 8
only uses the first three, and
.Xr s6-ipcserver-access 8
only uses the last two.
.Pp
Each of those directories contains a set of rules.
A rule is a subdirectory named after the set of keys it matches, and
containing actions that will be executed if the rule is the first
matching rule for the tested key.
.Pp
The syntax for the rule name is dependent on the nature of keys, and
fully documented in
.Xr s6-accessrules 7 .
For instance, a subdirectory named 192.168.0.0_27 in the
.Pa ip4
directory will match every IPv4 address in the 192.168.0.0/27 network
that does not match a more precise rule.
.Pp
The syntax for the actions, however, is the same for every type of
key.
A rule subdirectory can contain the following elements:
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
A file (that can be empty) named
.Pa allow .
If such a file exists, a key matching this rule will be immediately
accepted.
.It
A file (that can be empty) named
.Pa deny .
If such a file exists and no
.Pa allow
file exists, a key matching this rule will be immediately denied.
.It
A subdirectory named
.Pa env .
If such a directory exists along with an
.Pa allow
file, then its contents represent environment modifications that will
be applied after accepting the connection and before executing the
next program in the chain, as if the
.Xr s6-envdir 8
program, without options, was applied to
.Pa env .
.Pa env
has exactly the same format as a directory suitable for
.Xr s6-envdir 8 ;
however, if the modifications take up more than 4096 bytes when
compiled into
.Ar cdbfile ,
then
.Nm
will complain and exit 100.
.It
A file named
.Pa exec .
If such a file exists along with an
.Pa allow
file, then its contents represent a command line that, interpreted by
the
.Xr execlineb 1
launcher, will be executed after accepting the connection, totally
bypassing the original command line.
.Nm
truncates the
.Pa exec
file to 4096 bytes max when embedding it into
.Ar cdbfile ,
so make sure it is not larger than that.
.El
.Pp
.Ar cdbfile
can exist prior to, and during, the compilation, which actually works
in a temporary file in the same directory as
.Ar cdbfile
and performs an atomic replacement when it is done.
So it is not necessary to interrupt a running service during the
compilation.
.Pp
If
.Nm
fails at some point, the temporary file is removed.
However, this doesn't happen if
.Nm
is interrupted by a signal.
.Pp
After the program successfully completes, if
.Ar dir
was a suitable candidate for the
.Fl i
option of
.Xr s6-ipcserver-access 8
or
.Xr s6-tcpserver-access 8 ,
then
.Ar cdbfile
will be a suitable candidate for the
.Fl x
option of the same program, implementing the same ruleset.
.Pp
.Ar cdbfile
can be decompiled by the
.Xr s6-accessrules-fs-from-cdb 8
program.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr execlineb 1 ,
.Xr s6-accessrules-fs-from-cdb 8 ,
.Xr s6-connlimit 8 ,
.Xr s6-ioconnect 8 ,
.Xr s6-ipcclient 8 ,
.Xr s6-ipcserver 8 ,
.Xr s6-ipcserver-access 8 ,
.Xr s6-ipcserver-socketbinder 8 ,
.Xr s6-ipcserverd 8 ,
.Xr s6-tcpserver-access 8
.Pp
[1]
.Lk https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cdb_(software)
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-accessrules-cdb-from-fs.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
