.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6-CONNLIMIT 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-connlimit
.Nd perform IP-based control on the number of client connections to a TCP socket, and uid-based control on the number of client connections to a Unix domain socket
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Ar prog...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
reads its environment for the
.Ev PROTO
environment variable, and then for
.Ev ${PROTO}CONNNUM
and
.Ev ${PROTO}CONNMAX ,
which must contain integers.
.Pp
If the value of
.Ev ${PROTO}CONNNUM
is superior or equal to the value of
.Ev ${PROTO}CONNMAX ,
.Nm
exits 1 with an error message.
.Pp
Else it execs into
.Ar prog... .
.Pp
If
.Ev ${PROTO}CONNMAX
is unset,
.Nm
directly execs into
.Ar prog...
without performing any check: no maximum number of connections has
been defined.
.Pp
The
.Xr s6-tcpserver4 8
and
.Xr s6-tcpserver6 8
programs define the
.Ev PROTO
environment variable to
.Dq TCP ,
and spawn every child server with the
.Ev TCPCONNNUM
environment variable set to the number of connections from the same IP
address.
The
.Xr s6-tcpserver-access 8
program can set environment variables depending on the client's IP
address.
If the
s6-tcpserver-access
database is configured to set the
.Ev TCPCONNMAX
environment variable for a given set of IP addresses, and
s6-tcpserver-access
execs into
.Nm ,
then
.Nm
will drop connections if there already are
.Ev ${TCPCONNMAX}
connections from the same client IP address.
.Pp
The
.Xr s6-ipcserver 8
and
.Xr s6-ipcserver-access 8
programs can be used the same way, with
.Dq IPC
instead of
.Dq TCP ,
to limit the number of client connections by UID.
.Pp
The
.Nm
utility was once part of the s6-networking[1] suite, and is mostly useful
with TCP connections, which is why the examples here involve TCP.
Nevertheless, it can be used with connections across Unix domain
sockets, and that is why it has been moved to the s6 package.
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following command line:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
s6-tcpserver4 -v2 -c1000 -C40 1.2.3.4 80 \
  s6-tcpserver-access -v2 -RHl0 -i dir \
  s6-connlimit \
  prog...
.Ed
.Pp
will run a server listening to IPv4 address 1.2.3.4, on port 80,
serving up to 1000 concurrent connections, and up to 40 concurrent
connections from the same IP address, no matter what the IP
address.
For every client connection, it will look up the database set up in
.Ql dir ;
if the connection is accepted, it will run
.Ql prog... .
.Pp
If the
.Pa dir/ip4/5.6.7.8_32/env/TCPCONNMAX
file exists and contains the string 30, then at most 30 concurrent
connections from 5.6.7.8 will execute
.Ql prog... ,
instead of the default of 40.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-accessrules-cdb-from-fs 8 ,
.Xr s6-accessrules-fs-from-cdb 8 ,
.Xr s6-ioconnect 8 ,
.Xr s6-ipcclient 8 ,
.Xr s6-ipcserver 8 ,
.Xr s6-ipcserver-access 8 ,
.Xr s6-ipcserver-socketbinder 8 ,
.Xr s6-ipcserverd 8 ,
.Xr s6-tcpserver-access 8 ,
.Xr s6-tcpserver4 8 ,
.Xr s6-tcpserver6 8
.Pp
[1]
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6-networking/
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-connlimit.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
