.Dd March 13, 2022
.Dt S6-ENVDIR 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-envdir
.Nd change environment, then execute into another program
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl I | i
.Op Fl n
.Op Fl f
.Op Fl L
.Op Fl c Ar nullis
.Ar dir
.Ar prog...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
reads files in
.Ar dir .
For every file
.Em f
in
.Ar dir ,
that does not begin with a dot and does not contain the
.Ql =
character:
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
If
.Em f
is empty, remove a variable named
.Ev f
from the environment, if any.
.It
Else add a variable named
.Ev f
to the environment (or replace
.Ev f
if it already exists) with the first line of the contents of file
.Pa f
as value.
Spaces and tabs at the end of this line are removed, as well as any
trailing newline; null characters in this line are changed to newlines
in the environment variable.
.El
.Pp
.Nm
without options behaves exactly like envdir[1].
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl i
Strict.
If
.Ar dir
does not exist, exit 111 with an error message.
This is the default.
.It Fl I
Loose.
If
.Ar dir
does not exist, exec into
.Ar prog
without modifying the environment first.
.It Fl f
Verbatim mode.
All the file is given as the value of the environment variable,
including newlines (except the last one if the
.Fl n
option is not given).
Null characters are still translated.
.It Fl n
Do not chomp.
If the
.Fl f
option is given and the file ends with a newline, keep that last
newline in the value.
If the
.Fl f
option is not given, keep the trailing blanks at the end of the first
line (but not the ending newline).
.It Fl L
Do not clamp.
With this option,
.Nm
will process the whole first line of each file (if the
.Fl f
option hasn't been given) or read each file entirely (if the
.Fl f
option has been given), even if it means adding huge variables to the
environment.
Without this option,
.Nm
only reads the first 4096 bytes of each file.
.It Fl c Ar nullis
Replace null characters with the first character of
.Ar nullis
instead of a newline.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-applyuidgid 8 ,
.Xr s6-envuidgid 8 ,
.Xr s6-fghack 8 ,
.Xr s6-setsid 8 ,
.Xr s6-setuidgid 8 ,
.Xr s6-softlimit 8 ,
.Xr s6-tai64n 8 ,
.Xr s6-tai64nlocal 8
.Pp
[1]
.Lk https://cr.yp.to/daemontools/envdir.html
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-envdir.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
