.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6-ENVUIDGID 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-envuidgid
.Nd potentially set the
.Ev UID ,
.Ev GID
and
.Ev GIDLIST
environment variables according to the options and arguments it is
given, then execute into another program
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl u | g | B
.Op Fl n
.Op Fl i | D Ar uid : Ns Ar gid : Ns Ar gidlist
.Ar account
.Ar prog...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
looks
.Ar account
up by name in the account database.
.Pp
It sets the UID environment variable to
.Ar account Ap
s uid, and the GID environment variable to
.Ar account Ap
s gid.
.Pp
It also sets the
.Ev GIDLIST
environment variable to a comma-separated list of supplementary group
ids
.Ar account
is a member of according to the group database. (If
.Ar account
doesn't belong to any other group than its primary group,
.Ev GIDLIST
is still set, but empty.)
.Pp
Then it executes into
.Ar prog... .
.Pp
.Nm
without options behaves like envuidgid[1], except that the exit code is 1 if
.Ar account
doesn't exist, and it also exports supplementary groups.
.Pp
.Nm
is useful when running a program that must start as root but can drop
its privileges later.
Such a program can read its new uid/gid/groups info from the
.Ev UID ,
.Ev GID
and
.Ev GIDLIST
environment variables.
Super-servers such as
.Xr s6-tcpserver4 8
make use of this.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl u
User.
.Ar account
will be interpreted as a user name; the
.Ev UID
environment variable will be set to its numerical value, and the
.Ev GID
and
.Ev GIDLIST
variables will not be touched.
.It Fl g
Group.
.Ar account
will be interpreted as a group name instead of a user name; the
.Ev GID
environment variable will be set to its numerical value, and the
.Ev UID
and
.Ev GIDLIST
variables will not be touched.
.It Fl B
Both user and group.
.Ar account
will be interpreted as
.Sm off
.So
.Em user :
.Em group
.Sc .
.Sm on
The
.Ev GIDLIST
variable will not be touched.
If
.Em user
does not exist, the
.Ev UID
variable will be set to 0 unless a better default is provided with the
.Fl D
option.
If
.Em group
does not exist, the
.Ev GID
variable will be set to 0 unless a better default is provided with the
.Fl D
option.
.It Fl n
Numerical fallback.
If
.Ar account
cannot be found in the user or group database, try to interpret the
given values literally.
For instance,
.Ql s6-envuidgid -B root:42
will fail if there's no group named
.Ql 42
in the group database, but
.Ql s6-envuidgid -nB root:42
will set
.Ev UID
to 0 and
.Ev GID
to 42.
.It Fl i
Insist.
If
.Ar account
is unknown, exit 1 with an error message.
This is the default.
.It Fl D Ar uid : Ns Ar gid : Ns Ar gidlist
If
.Ar account
is unknown, use
.Ar uid ,
.Ar gid
and
.Ar gidlist
as the values for
.Ev UID ,
.Ev GID
and
.Ev GIDLIST .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-applyuidgid 8 ,
.Xr s6-envdir 8 ,
.Xr s6-fghack 8 ,
.Xr s6-setsid 8 ,
.Xr s6-setuidgid 8 ,
.Xr s6-softlimit 8 ,
.Xr s6-tai64n 8 ,
.Xr s6-tai64nlocal 8 ,
.Xr s6-tcpserver4 8
.Pp
[1]
.Lk https://cr.yp.to/daemontools/envuidgid.html
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-envuidgid.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
