.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6-FTRIGRD 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-ftrigrd
.Nd helper program that manages a set of subscriptions to
.Xr s6-fifodir 7 Ns s
as well as regular expressions on events
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
takes orders from its client program that controls it via
.Xr s6-ftrigr 7 ,
and notifies it when desired events happen.
.Nm
is not meant to be called directly.
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
If the client program uses
.Fn ftrigr_startf ,
it spawns an instance of
.Nm
as a child.
.Nm s6-ftrigrd Ap
s stdin is a pipe reading from the client; its stdout is a pipe
writing to the client; its stderr is the same as the client's; and
there's an additional pipe from
.Nm
to the client, used for asynchronous notifications.
.It
If the client program uses
.Fn ftrigr_start ,
then it tries to connect to a Unix domain socket.
An
.Nm
local service should be listening to that socket, i.e. a Unix domain
super-server such as
.Xr s6-ipcserver 8
spawning an
.Nm
program on every connection.
Then an
.Nm
instance is created for the client.
.It
When the client uses
.Fn ftrigr_end , or closes
.Nm s6-ftrigrd Ap
s stdin in any way,
.Nm
exits 0.
.El
.Pp
.Nm
handles the grunt work of creating fifos in a fifodir for a
subscriber.
It also wakes up on every event, and compares the chain of events it
received on a given fifodir with the client-provided regexp.
If the chain of events matches the regexp, it notifies the client.
.Pp
The connection management between the client and
.Nm
is entirely done by the textclient library from skalibs[1].
.Pp
.Nm
is entirely asynchronous.
It stores unread notifications into heap memory; it can grow in size
if there are a lot of events and the client fails to read them.
To avoid uncontrolled growth, make sure your client calls
.Fn ftrigr_update
as soon as
.Fn ftrigr_fd
becomes readable.
.Pp
An
.Nm
instance can only handle up to
.Dv FTRIGRD_MAX
.Po
defined in
.Pa s6/ftrigr.h
.Pc
subscriptions at once.
By default, this number is 1000, which is more than enough for any
reasonable system.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-cleanfifodir 8 ,
.Xr s6-ftrig-listen 8 ,
.Xr s6-ftrig-listen1 8 ,
.Xr s6-ftrig-notify 8 ,
.Xr s6-ftrig-wait 8 ,
.Xr s6-mkfifodir 8
.Pp
[1]
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/skalibs/
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/libs6/s6-ftrigrd.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
