.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6-FDHOLDER-LIST 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-fdholder-list
.Nd list the descriptors currently held by
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl t Ar timeout
.Ar path
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
connects to an
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
server process listening on
.Ar path .
.Pp
It gets the list of identifiers corresponding to the currently held
file descriptors.
It prints this list to stdout, one per line.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl t Ar timeout
If the operation cannot be processed in
.Ar timeout
milliseconds, then fail with an error message.
Communications with the server should be near-instant, so this option
is only here to protect users against programming errors (connecting
to the wrong socket, for instance).
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It 0
Success.
.It 1
The server denied the operation.
The meanings of the error messages are explained in
.Xr s6-fdholder-error-codes 7 .
.It 100
Wrong usage.
.It 111
System call failed - this includes attempting to connect to a
nonexistent socket, or one where no
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
daemon is listening.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-fdholder-daemon 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-delete 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-getdump 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-retrieve 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-setdump 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-store 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-transferdump 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-fdholder-list.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
