.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6-FDHOLDER-GETDUMP 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-fdholder-getdump
.Nd connect to an
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
daemon listening on a Unix domain socket, and retrieves its entire
state: file descriptors with their identifiers and expiration dates
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl t Ar timeout
.Ar path
.Ar prog...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
connects to an
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
server process listening on
.Ar path .
.Pp
It retrieves a copy of the whole set of file descriptors stored in
this daemon, including their identifiers and expiration dates.
.Pp
It then executes into
.Ar prog...
with the additional open descriptors and the additional environment
variables.
.Pp
Getting the whole state of an
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
daemon requires specific privileges.
Make sure you properly configure
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
access rights so your client can perform that operation.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl t Ar timeout
If the operation cannot be processed in
.Ar timeout
milliseconds, then fail with an error message.
Communications with the server should be near-instant, so this option
is only here to protect users against programming errors (connecting
to the wrong socket, for instance).
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Ar prog...
is executed with the following environment variables set:
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
.Ev S6_FD#
contains the number
.Va n
of file descriptors retrieved from the server.
.It
Then, for every
.Va i
between 0 and
.Va n Ns -1
inclusive:
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Ev S6_FD_ Ns Va i
Contains the number of the
.Va i Ns th
open file descriptor.
.It Ev S6_FDID_ Ns Va i
Contains the identifier of the
.Va i Ns th
open file descriptor.
.It Ev S6_FDLIMIT_ Ns Va i
Contains the expiration date of the
.Va i Ns th
open file descriptor, if applicable.
That date is stored in external TAI64N format[1].
If the file descriptor is not supposed to expire, this
environment variable is not defined.
.El
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
On success, the program doesn't exit; instead, it execs into
.Ar prog... .
.Bl -tag -width x
.It 1
The server denied the operation.
The meanings of the error messages are explained in
.Xr s6-fdholder-error-codes 7 .
.It 100
Wrong usage.
.It 111
System call failed - this includes attempting to connect to a
nonexistent socket, or one where no
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
daemon is listening.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Dl s6-fdholder-getdump /service/fdholderd/s s6-fdholder-setdump /service/fdholderd-2/s
.Pp
will get the state of the
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
daemon listening on the
.Pa /service/fdholderd/s
socket, and transmit it to the other
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
daemon listening on the
.Pa /service/fdholderd-2/s
socket.
Note that in this precise case, the
.Xr s6-fdholder-transferdump 8
program does the same thing more efficiently.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-fdholder-daemon 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-delete 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-list 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-retrieve 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-setdump 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-store 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-transferdump 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8 ,
.Pp
[1]
.Lk https://cr.yp.to/libtai/tai64.html#tai64n
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-fdholder-getdump.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
