.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6-FDHOLDER-STORE 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-fdholder-store
.Nd connect to an
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
daemon listening on a Unix domain socket, and give it a copy of one of
its open file descriptors for the daemon to hold
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl d Ar fd
.Op Fl T Ar fdtimeout
.Op Fl t Ar timeout
.Ar path
.Ar id
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
connects to an
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
server process listening on
.Ar path .
.Pp
It attempts to pass a copy of its standard input, or of its descriptor
.Ar fd ,
to the server, with identifier
.Ar id .
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl d Ar fd
Store descriptor number
.Ar fd .
By default,
.Ar fd
is 0 (i.e. the program's stdin will be stored).
.It Fl T Ar fdtimeout
The descriptor is stored with an expiration time of
.Ar fdtimeout
milliseconds, which means the
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
daemon will close and get rid of the descriptor after this time.
By default,
.Ar fdtimeout
is 0, which means infinite - no expiration time.
.It Fl t Ar timeout
If the operation cannot be processed in
.Ar timeout
milliseconds, then fail with an error message.
Communications with the server should be near-instant, so this option
is only here to protect users against programming errors (connecting
to the wrong socket, for instance).
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It 0
Success.
.It 1
The server denied the operation.
The meanings of the error messages are explained in
.Xr s6-fdholder-error-codes 7 .
.It 100
Wrong usage.
.It 111
System call failed - this includes attempting to connect to a
nonexistent socket, or one where no
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
daemon is listening.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Dl s6-ipcserver-socketbinder /tmp/mysocket s6-fdholder-store /service/fdholderd/s MYSOCKET
.Pp
will open a Unix domain socket, bind it to
.Pa /tmp/mysocket
and listen to incoming connections, then give it to an
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
instance listening on
.Pa /service/fdholderd/s ,
with no expiration date, with the
.Dq MYSOCKET
identifier.
Another program will be able to retrieve the socket later, using
.Xr s6-fdholder-retrieve 8 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-fdholder-daemon 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-delete 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-getdump 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-list 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-retrieve 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-setdump 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-transferdump 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-fdholder-store.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
