.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6-FDHOLDER-DAEMON 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-fdholder-daemon
.Nd fd-holding daemon
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl 1
.Op Fl v Ar verbosity
.Op Fl d | D
.Op Fl c Ar maxconn
.Op Fl n Ar maxfds
.Op Fl b Ar backlog
.Op Fl G Ar gidlist
.Op Fl g Ar gid
.Op Fl u Ar uid
.Op Fl U
.Op Fl t Ar clienttimeout
.Op Fl T Ar lameducktimeout
.Op Fl i Ar rulesdir | Fl x Ar rulesfile
.Ar path
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
listens on a Unix domain socket, then accepts client connections; it
stores file descriptors on behalf of clients, along with an identifier
for every file descriptor stored, and possibly an expiration date
(after which the file descriptor will be forgotten).
It also allows clients to retrieve a file descriptor by its
identifier.
.Pp
.Nm
parses the options and arguments it is given, and builds a new command
line with them.
It then executes into that new command line.
.Pp
The first program
.Nm
executes into is
.Xr s6-ipcserver-socketbinder 8 .
It will create and bind a Unix domain socket to
.Ar path ,
then execute into the rest of the command line.
.Pp
If a privilege-dropping operation has been requested, the program that
.Xr s6-ipcserver-socketbinder 8
executes into is
.Xr s6-applyuidgid 8 .
It will drop root privileges, then execute into the rest of the
command line.
.Pp
The last program in the chain is
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8 .
It is executed into by
.Xr s6-applyuidgid 8 ,
or directly by
.Xr s6-ipcserver-socketbinder 8
if no privilege-dropping operation has been requested.
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
is the long-lived process, the daemon itself, performing fd holding
and accepting connections from clients.
.Pp
.Nm
does not interpret its options itself.
It just dispatches them to the appropriate program on the command line
that it builds.
.Pp
From the user's point of view,
.Nm
behaves like a long-lived process, even if the long-lived process
itself is called
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8 .
Every operational detail of
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
applies to
.Nm
as well; in particular, make sure to properly configure the clients'
access rights, as described in
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8 .
.Pp
.Nm
is meant to be used in an s6 run script, as a supervised local
service.
It does not fork itself or write to syslog.
However, it can be run under any infrastructure, including other
supervision infrastructures, OpenRC, systemd, or SysV scripts.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl 1
Write a newline to stdout, before closing it, right after binding and
listening to the Unix socket.
If stdout is suitably redirected, this can be used by monitoring
programs to check when the server is ready to accept connections.
.It Fl v Ar verbosity
Be quiet, normally verbose, or more verbose, depending on if verbosity
is 0, 1, or more.
The default is 1.
.It Fl d
Allow instant rebinding to the same path even if it has been used not
long ago - this is the
.Dv SO_REUSEADDR
flag to
.Xr setsockopt 2
and is generally used with server programs.
This is the default.
Note that
.Ar path
will be deleted if it already exists at program start time.
.It Fl D
Disallow instant rebinding to the same path.
.It Fl c Ar maxconn
Accept at most
.Ar maxconn
concurrent client connections.
Default is 16.
It is impossible to set it higher than the value of the
.Dv S6_FDHOLDER_MAX
macro, which is 256.
Client connections to this server are short-lived, so this number
needs not be too high.
Every client connection eats up one available file descriptor, so it
is best for
.Ar maxconn
to be as small as possible.
.It Fl n Ar maxfds
Store at most
.Ar maxfds
file descriptors.
Default is 1000.
It is impossible to set it higher than the number of files that can be
opened by the
.Nm
process minus a few descriptors needed for correct
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
operation.
Before running
.Nm ,
make sure to properly adjust, via
.Xr s6-softlimit 8 ,
the number of openable files[1] of the current process.
.It Fl b Ar backlog
Set a maximum of
.Ar backlog
backlog connections on the socket.
Extra connection attempts will rejected by the kernel.
.It Fl G Ar gidlist
Change
.Nm Ap
s supplementary group list to
.Ar gidlist
after binding the socket.
This is only valid when run as root.
.Ar gidlist
must be a comma-separated list of numerical group IDs.
.It Fl g Ar gid
Change
.Nm Ap
s groupid to
.Ar gid
after binding the socket.
This is only valid when run as root.
.It Fl u Ar uid
Change
.Nm Ap
s userid to
.Ar uid
after binding the socket.
This is only valid when run as root.
.It Fl U
Change
.Nm Ap
s user id, group id and supplementary group list according to the
values of the
.Ev UID ,
.Ev GID
and
.Ev GIDLIST
environment variables after binding the socket.
This is only valid when run as root.
This can be used with the
.Xr s6-envuidgid 8
program to easily script a service that binds to a privileged socket
then drops its privileges to those of a named non-root account.
.It Fl t Ar clienttimeout
Disconnect a client if it's in the middle of an operation and it has
not written or read any data in
.Ar clienttimeout
milliseconds.
By default,
.Ar clienttimeout
is 0, which means infinite.
.It Fl T Ar lameducktimeout
Give clients
.Ar lameducktimeout
milliseconds to finish their current operation before exiting after
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
has received a SIGTERM.
By default,
.Ar lameducktimeout
is 0, which means infinite.
.It Fl x Ar rulesfile
Read access rights configuration from CDB file
.Ar rulesfile .
.It Fl i Ar rulesdir
Read access rights configuration from the filesystem in directory
.Ar rulesdir .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-fdholder-delete 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-getdump 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-list 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-retrieve 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-setdump 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-store 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-transferdump 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
.Pp
[1]
.Lk https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/basedefs/sys_resource.h.html
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-fdholder-daemon.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
