.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6-FDHOLDER-RETRIEVE 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-fdholder-retrieve
.Nd connect to an
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
daemon listening on a Unix domain socket, retrieve a file descriptor
from this daemon, then execute a program with this file descriptor as
the program's standard input
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl D
.Op Fl t Ar timeout
.Ar path
.Ar id
.Ar prog...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
connects to an
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
server process listening on
.Ar path .
.Pp
It attempts to retrieve a copy of the file descriptor that has been
stored into that daemon under identifier
.Ar id .
.Pp
It then executes into
.Ar prog... ,
with the retrieved file descriptor as standard input.
.Pp
To execute
.Ar prog
with the newly retrieved file descriptor as number
.Em n
while preserving stdin, use the following construct:
.Pp
.Dl fdmove n 0 s6-fdholder-retrieve path id fdswap 0 n prog....
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl D
Delete the file descriptor from the server's storage after
retrieval.
This option requires writing rights over the given identifier as well
as reading rights: check the server's configuration.
Refer to
.Xr s6-fdholder 7
for details.
.It Fl t Ar timeout
If the operation cannot be processed in
.Ar timeout
milliseconds, then fail with an error message.
Communications with the server should be near-instant, so this option
is only here to protect users against programming errors (connecting
to the wrong socket, for instance).
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
On success, the program doesn't exit; instead, it execs into
.Ar prog... .
.Bl -tag -width x
.It 1
The server denied the operation.
The meanings of the error messages are explained in
.Xr s6-fdholder-error-codes 7 .
.It 100
Wrong usage.
.It 111
System call failed - this includes attempting to connect to a
nonexistent socket, or one where no
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
daemon is listening.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Dl s6-fdholder-retrieve /service/fdholderd/s MYSOCKET s6-ipcserverd cat
.Pp
will retrieve a file descriptor stored under the
.Ql MYSOCKET
identifier in the
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
daemon listening on the
.Pa /service/fdholderd/s
socket, and execute into
.Ql s6-ipcserverd cat
with this file descriptor as stdin.
In this case, if
.Ql MYSOCKET
referred to a Unix domain socket,
.Xr s6-ipcserverd 8
will then accept client connections on it and spawn a
.Ql cat
program for every connection.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-fdholder-daemon 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-delete 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-getdump 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-list 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-setdump 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-store 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-transferdump 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-fdholder-retrieve.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
