.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6-FTRIG-LISTEN 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-ftrig-listen
.Nd subscribe to several
.Xr s6-fifodir 7 Ns s ,
spawn a program, then wait for pattern of events to occur on the
fifodirs
.Sh SYNOPSIS
In an
.Xr execlineb 1
script:
.Pp
.Nm
.Op Fl a | o
.Op Fl t Ar timeout
.Bro
.Ar fifodir-1
.Ar regexp-1
.Ar fifodir-2
.Ar regexp-2
.Brc
.Ar prog...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
subscribes to
.Ar fifodir1
with the regexp
.Ar regexp1 ,
to
.Ar fifodir2
with the regexp
.Ar regexp2 ,
and so on.
.Pp
It then forks and execs
.Ar prog...
with all its arguments.
.Pp
It waits for the series of events received on
.Ar fifodir Ns - Ns Em i
to match
.Ar regexp Ns - Ns Em i .
.Ar regexp Ns - Ns Em i
must be Extended Regular Expressions[1].
.Pp
When the series of read events matches the regexps,
.Nm
exits 0.
.Nm
can be used outside of an execlineb script by using the internal argv
syntax, but this syntax is an implementation detail and is not
documented as stable.
In a shell script, use
.Ql execlineb -Pc 's6-ftrig-listen ...'
to get the benefits of the execlineb brace syntax.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl t Ar timeout
If the events on the fifodirs have not matched the regexps after
.Ar timeout
milliseconds, print an error message on stderr and exit 1.
By default,
.Nm
waits indefinitely for a matching series of events.
.It Fl a
And (conjunction).
.Nm
will only exit when all the
.Ar fifodir Ns - Ns Em i
have been notified with events matching the corresponding
.Ar regexp Ns - Ns Em i .
This is the default.
.It Fl o
Or (disjunction).
.Nm
will exit as soon as one of the
.Ar fifodir Ns - Ns Em i
has been notified with events matching its
.Ar regexp Ns - Ns Em i .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr execlineb 1 ,
.Xr s6-cleanfifodir 8 ,
.Xr s6-ftrig-listen1 8 ,
.Xr s6-ftrig-notify 8 ,
.Xr s6-ftrig-wait 8 ,
.Xr s6-ftrigrd 8 ,
.Xr s6-mkfifodir 8
.Pp
[1]
.Lk https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/basedefs/V1_chap09.html#tag_09_04
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-ftrig-listen.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
