.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6-FDHOLDER-TRANSFERDUMP 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-fdholder-transferdump
.Nd connect to two separate
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
daemons and transfer the content of the first one to the second one
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.\" '-T lint' reports "WARNING: skipping no-space macro",
.\" but the rendered output is correct.
.Op Fl t Ar timeoutfrom : Ns Ar timeoutto
.Ar pathfrom
.Ar pathto
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
connects to an
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
server process listening on
.Ar pathfrom
and gets the whole set of file descriptors from this server, with
their identifiers and (when relevant) expiration dates.
.Pp
It then connects to a different instance of
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8 ,
listening on
.Ar pathto ,
and stores the set of file descriptors in it.
The set is added to the second server, which keeps the descriptors it
was already holding.
.Pp
Dumping the entire state of
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
requires special authorizations.
Make sure the
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
instances are configured to accept dump-getting and dump-setting
requests from your client.
Refer to
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
for details.
.Pp
A typical use case of
.Nm
is when the main fd-holding daemon needs to upgrade, or restart for
some reason.
Transferring the file descriptors into another, temporary, fd-holding
daemon instance allows it to restart without losing the descriptors.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.\" '-T lint' reports "WARNING: skipping no-space macro",
.\" but the rendered output is correct.
.It Fl t Ar timeoutfrom : Ns Ar timeoutto
If the operations cannot be processed in
.Ar timeoutfrom
.Po
for the connection to
.Ar pathfrom
.Pc
or
.Ar timeoutto
.Po
for the connection to
.Ar pathto
.Pc
milliseconds, then fail with an error message.
Communications with the servers should be near-instant, so this option
is only here to protect users against programming errors (connecting
to the wrong socket, for instance).
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It 0
Success.
.It 1
The source server denied the operation.
The meanings of the error messages are explained in
.Xr s6-fdholder-error-codes 7 .
.It 2
The destination server denied the operation.
The meanings of the error messages are explained in
.Xr s6-fdholder-error-codes 7 .
.It 100
Wrong usage.
.It 111
System call failed - this includes attempting to connect to a
nonexistent socket, or one where no
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
daemon is listening.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-fdholder-daemon 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-delete 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-getdump 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-list 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-retrieve 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-setdump 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-store 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-fdholder-transferdump.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
