.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6-FDHOLDER-SETDUMP 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-fdholder-setdump
.Nd connect to an
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
daemon listening on a Unix domain socket, and dump a set of file
descriptors into that daemon
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl t Ar timeout
.Ar path
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
connects to an
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
server process listening on
.Ar path .
.Pp
It attempts to pass a complete state - i.e. a set of file descriptors
with identifiers and expiration dates - to the server.
.Pp
The file descriptors to transmit to the server should of course be
already open in the
.Nm
program; also,
.Nm
should have certain environment variables that describe that set of
file descriptors.
The format of the environment is the same as the one set by
.Xr s6-fdholder-getdump 8 .
.Pp
Setting the whole state of an
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
daemon requires specific privileges.
Make sure you properly configure
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
access rights so your client can perform that operation.
.Pp
Previously held fds will still be kept by the server (so,
.Dq setting
the state is more like
.Dq adding to
the state), unless there is an identifier collision, in which case the
fd in the transmitted set takes precedence and the previously held fd
is overwritten.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl t Ar timeout
If the operation cannot be processed in
.Ar timeout
milliseconds, then fail with an error message.
Communications with the server should be near-instant, so this option
is only here to protect users against programming errors (connecting
to the wrong socket, for instance).
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It 0
Success.
.It 1
The server denied the operation.
The meanings of the error messages are explained in
.Xr s6-fdholder-error-codes 7 .
.It 100
Wrong usage.
.It 111
System call failed - this includes attempting to connect to a
nonexistent socket, or one where no
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
daemon is listening.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-fdholder-daemon 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-delete 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-getdump 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-list 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-retrieve 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-store 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholder-transferdump 8 ,
.Xr s6-fdholderd 8
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-fdholder-setdump.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
