.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6-IPCSERVER-ACCESS 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-ipcserver-access
.Nd control tool for Unix domain sockets on systems where the
.Fn getpeereid
system call can be implemented
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl v Ar verbosity
.Op Fl E | e
.Op Fl l Ar localname
.Op Fl i Ar rulesdir | Fl x Ar rulesfile
.Ar prog...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is meant to be run after
.Xr s6-ipcserverd 8
and before the application program on the
.Xr s6-ipcserver 8
command line.
.Pp
.Nm
checks it is run under a UCSPI server tool such as
.Xr s6-ipcserver 8 .
.Pp
It checks that the remote end of the connection fits the accepted
criteria defined by the database contained in
.Ar rulesdir
or
.Ar rulesfile .
If the database tells it to reject the connection, the program exits
1.
.Pp
It sets up a few additional environment variables.
.Pp
It executes into
.Ar prog... ,
unless the first matching rule in the rule database includes
instructions to override
.Ar prog... .
.Ss Access rule checking
.Nm
checks its client connection against a ruleset.
This ruleset can be implemented:
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
either in the filesystem as an arborescence of directories and files,
if the
.Fl i
option has been given.
This option is the most flexible one: the directory format is simple
enough for scripts to understand and modify it, and the ruleset can be
changed dynamically.
This is practical, for instance, for roaming users.
.It
or in a CDB[1] file, if the
.Fl x
option has been given.
This option is the most efficient one if the ruleset is static enough:
a lot less system calls are needed to perform searches in a CDB than
in the filesystem.
.El
.Pp
The exact format of the ruleset is described in the
.Xr s6-accessrules-cdb-from-fs 8
page.
.Pp
.Nm
first reads the client UID
.Em uid
and GID
.Em gid
from the
.Ev ${PROTO}REMOTEEUID
and
.Ev ${PROTO}REMOTEEGID
environment variables, and checks them with the
.Fn s6_accessrules_keycheck_uidgid
function - refer to
.Xr s6-accessrules 7 .
In other words, it tries to match:
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
(if the client's effective uid is the same as
.Sm off
.Nm Ap
.Sm on
effective uid)
.Pa uid/self
.It
.Sm off
.Pa uid/
.Em uid
.Sm on
.It
(if the client's effective gid is the same as
.Sm off
.Nm Ap
.Sm on
effective gid)
.Pa gid/self
.It
.Sm off
.Pa gid/
.Em gid
.Sm on
.It
.Pa uid/default
.El
.Pp
in that order.
If no
.Dv S6_ACCESSRULES_ALLOW
result can be obtained, the connection is denied.
.Ss Environment and executable modifications
.Nm
interprets non-empty
.Pa env
subdirectories and
.Pa exec
files it finds in the first matching rule of the ruleset, as explained
in the
.Xr s6-accessrules-cdb-from-fs 8
page.
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
An
.Pa env
subdirectory is interpreted as if the
.Xr s6-envdir 8
command had been called before executing
.Ar prog :
the environment is modified according to the contents of
.Pa env .
.It
An
.Pa exec
file containing
.Em newprog
completely bypasses the rest of
.Sm off
.Nm Ap
.Sm on
command line.
After environment modifications, if any,
.Nm
execs into
.Ql execlineb -c newprog .
Please be aware that the
.Pa exec
file functionality is only supported when s6 has been built with
execline support.
Otherwise, a warning message is printed and executable diversion is
not performed.
.El
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl v Ar verbosity
Be more or less verbose, i.e. print more or less information to stderr:
.Bl -tag -width x
.It 0
Only log error messages.
.It 1
Only log error and warning messages, and accepted connections.
This is the default.
.It 2
Also log rejected connections and more warning messages.
.El
.It Fl E
No environment.
All environment variables potentially set by
.Nm ,
as well as those set by
.Xr s6-ipcserver 8 ,
will be unset instead.
.It Fl e
Set up environment variables normally.
This is the default.
.It Fl l Ar localname
Use
.Ar localname
as the value for the
.Ev ${PROTO}LOCALPATH
environment variable, instead of looking it up via
.Xr getsockname 2 .
.It Fl i Ar rulesdir
Check client credentials against a filesystem-based database in the
.Ar rulesdir
directory.
.It Fl x Ar rulesfile
Check client credentials against a CDB[1] database in the
.Ar rulesfile
file.
.Fl i
and
.Fl x
are mutually exclusive.
If none of those options is given, no credential checking will be
performed, and a warning will be emitted on every connection if
.Ar verbosity
is 2 or more.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Nm
expects to inherit some environment variables from its parent:
.Bl -tag -width x
.It PROTO
Normally IPC, but could be anything else, like UNIX.
.It ${PROTO}REMOTEEUID
The effective UID of the client program connecting to the socket.
.It ${PROTO}REMOTEEGID
The effective GID of the client program connecting to the socket.
.El
.Pp
Additionally, it exports the following variable before executing into
.Ar prog... :
.Bl -tag -width x
.It ${PROTO}LOCALPATH
Set to the local
.Dq address
of the socket, as reported by the
.Xr getsockname 2
system call, truncated to 99 characters max.
.El
.Pp
Also, the access rules database can instruct
.Nm
to set up, or unset, more environment variables, depending on the
client address.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-accessrules-cdb-from-fs 8 ,
.Xr s6-accessrules-fs-from-cdb 8 ,
.Xr s6-connlimit 8 ,
.Xr s6-ioconnect 8 ,
.Xr s6-ipcclient 8 ,
.Xr s6-ipcserver 8 ,
.Xr s6-ipcserver-socketbinder 8 ,
.Xr s6-ipcserverd 8
.Pp
[1]
.Lk https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cdb_(software)
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-ipcserver-access.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
