.Dd January 15, 2023
.Dt S6-INSTANCE-MAKER 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-instance-maker
.Nd create an
.Xr s6-service-directory 7
implementing an
.Xr s6-instanced-service 7
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl c Ar maxinstances
.Op Fl r Ar service Ns Op / Ns Ar logger Ns Op / Ns Ar pipeline
.Op Fl u Ar user
.Op Fl l Ar loguser
.Op Fl L Ar logdir
.Op Fl t Ar stamptype
.Op Fl n Ar nfiles
.Op Fl s Ar filesize
.Op Fl S Ar maxsize
.Op Fl P Ar prefix
.Ar template
.Ar dir
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Give
.Nm
a templated service directory describing how to run an instance of a
service, and it will create a different service directory that can
launch and manage several instances; each of these instances will be
running a copy of the service directory you gave.
.Pp
Alternatively,
.Nm
can create source definition directories for the s6-rc service manager[1].
.Pp
.Nm
creates a service directory in
.Ar dir
(which must not already exist).
The created service will be a supervisor for a set of instances \(em
initially empty \(em each running a copy of the service directory
given in
.Ar template .
.Pp
.Nm
is an
.Em offline
tool: it is run before you need instances.
Once the created service directory is live, i.e. there is a supervisor
running on it, then you can create and delete individual instances via
the
.Xr s6-instance-create 8
and
.Xr s6-instance-delete 8
.Em online
tools, that work with active services.
.Pp
.Nm
makes use of the fact that execline[2] scripts are much easier to
generate programmatically and to harden than shell scripts, so it is
only built if s6 is built with execline support - i.e. the
.Ql --disable-execline
switch has
.Em not
been given to configure.
.Pp
If
.Nm
encounters failure (and exits 111), it does not clean up the
directories it created.
Make sure to always test
.Nm Ap
s return code and clean up after it if needed.
.Ss The templated service directory
.Ar template
should be a directory that looks exactly like a service directory.
It will not be live, i.e. at no point will
.Ar template
itself be supervised; instead, a copy of it is stored under
.Ar dir
.Po
and a copy of that copy will be used for every instance of the
service
.Pc .
You can safely move or delete
.Ar template
after running
.Nm .
.Pp
To differentiate between instances, the
.Pa run
and
.Pa finish
script in
.Ar template
should take one additional argument
.Po
the first argument for
.Pa run
and the third argument for
.Pa finish
.Pc .
This argument will be the name of the instance, as provided by the
.Xr s6-instance-create 8
invocation.
.Ss Logging
The service is logged: its stderr and stdout are piped to an
.Xr s6-log 8
process running as
.Ar loguser
and writing to the
.Ar logdir
directory.
This logger is the catch-all logger for all the instances and the
supervision tree hosting them.
If
.Ar user
and
.Ar loguser
are provided, it is recommended to make them distinct from each other.
.Pp
Additionally, if
.Ar template
has a
.Ar log
subdirectory, then each instance will have its own dedicated logger.
The
.Pa run
and
.Pa finish
scripts for the logger of an instance named
.Ar name
will be called with an additional argument of
.Ar name Ns /log .
They should make use of this, to ensure loggers are properly
differentiated between instances: for instance, it is not possible to
run several
.Xr s6-log 8
processes on the same log directory, so an instance logger script
containing an invocation of
.Xr s6-log 8
on a fixed logdir will fail as soon as there are 2 instances.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl c Ar max
Plan for a maximum of
.Ar max
instances.
Default is
.Em 500 .
You can't set it lower than 2 or higher than 90000.
If your template service directory is logged, it's unadvisable to set
this above the default.
.It Fl r Ar service Ns Op / Ns Ar logger Ns Op / Ns Ar pipeline
Create s6-rc[1] source definition directories.
When this option is given,
.Ar dir
is not created as a service directory, but as a directory containing
at least one service:
.Pa "" Ns Ar dir Ns / Ns Ar service .
.Ar dir
is suitable as a source argument to s6-rc-compile[3].
If a
.Ar logger
part is given, then a second service,
.Pa "" Ns Ar dir Ns /logger ,
is also created, as a consumer for
.Pa "" Ns Ar dir Ns / Ns Ar service ,
and the
.Fl L
option must also be used, to provide a directory to store the logs into.
If the
.Pa "" Ns / Ns Ar pipeline
part is also given,
.Ar pipeline
is used as a name for a bundle containing both
.Ar service
and
.Pa logger .
When the
.Fl r
option is not given at all,
.Pa "" Ns Ar dir
is a regular service directory for direct inclusion (or linking) in a host
.Xr s6-scan-directory 7 ,
and if the
.Fl L
option is given then the logger for the instance supervisor and all
its instances is declared in
.Pa "" Ns Ar dir Ns /log .
.It Fl u Ar user
Run the instance supervisor, and all of the instances, as user
.Ar user .
This option should only be used when the supervision tree that will
host the instanced service is run as root.
The default is that the service runs as the same user as the host
supervision tree.
.It Fl l Ar loguser
Run the logger of the instance supervisor, if any
.Po
see
.Fl L
below
.Pc
as user
.Ar loguser .
This option should only be used when the supervision tree that will
host the instanced service is run as root.
The default is that the logger runs as the same user as the host
supervision tree.
.It Fl L Ar logdir
Make the service logged via
.Xr s6-log 8 ,
and ensure its log messages go into
.Ar logdir .
Error messages from the instance supervisor as well as from every
instance will be logged to
.Ar logdir .
If this option is not given, these error messages will fall through to
the host supervision tree's catch-all logger, if any, or standard
error otherwise.
The options listed below are only used to configured the logger and
are meaningless if
.Fl L
is not given.
.It Fl t Ar stamptype
How logs are timestamped in
.Ar logdir .
0 means no timestamp, 1 means external TAI64N format[4], 2 means ISO
8601 format[5], and 3 means both.
Default is
.Em 1 .
.It Fl n Ar nfiles
Maximum number of archive files in
.Ar logdir .
Default is
.Em 10 .
.It Fl s Ar filesize
Maximum size of the
.Pa current
file
.Po
and archive files
.Pc
in
.Ar logdir .
Default is
.Em 1000000 .
.It Fl S Ar maxsize
Maximum total size of the archives in
.Ar logdir .
Default is
.Em 0 ,
meaning no limits apart from those enforced by the
.Fl n
and
.Fl s
options.
.It Fl P Ar prefix
when logging to
.Ar logdir ,
prefix logged lines with the
.Ar prefix
string.
Default is no prefix.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It 0
Success.
.It 100
Wrong usage.
.It 111
System call failed.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-instanced-service 7 ,
.Xr s6-instance-control 8 ,
.Xr s6-instance-create 8 ,
.Xr s6-instance-delete 8 ,
.Xr s6-instance-list 8 ,
.Xr s6-instance-status 8
.Pp
[1]
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6-rc/
.Pp
[2]
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/execline/
.Pp
[3]
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6-rc/s6-rc-compile.html
.Pp
[4]
.Lk https://cr.yp.to/libtai/tai64.html
.Pp
[5]
.Lk https://www.iso.org/iso/home/standards/iso8601.htm
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
