.Dd February 19, 2023
.Dt S6-IOCONNECT 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-ioconnect
.Nd perform full-duplex data transmission between two sets of open file descriptors
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl t Ar millisecs
.Op Fl r Ar fdr
.Op Fl w Ar fdw
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
reads data from its stdin and writes it as-is to file descriptor 7,
which is assumed to be open.
.Pp
It also reads data from its file descriptor 6, which is assumed to be
open, and writes it as-is to its stdout.
.Pp
When both sides have transmitted EOF and
.Nm
has flushed its buffers, it exits 0.
.Pp
The point of
.Nm
is to be used together with
s6-tcpclient
or
.Xr s6-ipcclient 8
to establish a full-duplex connection between the client and the
server, for instance for testing purposes.
.Nm
is to
s6-tcpclient
as
.Xr cat 1
is to
s6-tcpserver:
a program that will just echo what it gets.
.Pp
The
.Nm
utility was once part of the s6-networking suite, which is why the
examples here involve TCP.
Nevertheless, it can be used with connections across Unix domain
sockets as well, and has its place in the s6 package.
.Pp
If one of the endpoints is a socket,
.Nm
will call
.Xr shutdown 2
on it (for reading or writing, depending on the endpoint) when it
needs to transmit EOF.
This is a necessary workaround to a misdesign[1] of the socket API,
but it could have unintended consequences when the socket is shared
among several processes that expect a persistent connection.
Most of the time, however, it is a mistake to share a data socket
between processes, so
.Nm Ap s
behaviour is suited to an overwhelming majority of cases, and the
exceptions are specialized enough that they won't need to use
.Nm .
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl t Ar millisecs
If no activity on either side happens for
.Ar millisecs
milliseconds,
.Nm
closes the connection on both ends and exits 1.
By default,
.Ar millisecs
is 0, which means no such timeout.
.It Fl r Ar fdr
Use fd
.Ar fdr
for
.Dq remote
reading instead of fd 6.
.It Fl w Ar fdw
Use fd
.Ar fdw
for
.Dq remote
writing instead of fd 7.
.El
.Pp
The
.Fl 0 ,
.Fl 1 ,
.Fl 6
and
.Fl 7
options are still recognized for compatibility, but do nothing; they
are deprecated.
They were previously used to tell
.Nm
that the local reading, local writing, remote reading and remote
writing endpoints, respectively, were sockets \(em but this is now
autodetected.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-accessrules-cdb-from-fs 8 ,
.Xr s6-accessrules-fs-from-cdb 8 ,
.Xr s6-connlimit 8 ,
.Xr s6-ipcclient 8 ,
.Xr s6-ipcserver 8 ,
.Xr s6-ipcserver-access 8 ,
.Xr s6-ipcserver-socketbinder 8 ,
.Xr s6-ipcserverd 8
.Pp
[1]
.Lk https://cr.yp.to/tcpip/twofd.html
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-ioconnect.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
