.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6-IPCSERVERD 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-ipcserverd
.Nd serving part of the
.Xr s6-ipcserver 8
super-server
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl 1
.Op Fl v Ar verbosity
.Op Fl P | p
.Op Fl c Ar maxconn
.Op Fl C Ar localmaxconn
.Ar prog...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
assumes that its stdin is a bound and listening Unix domain socket,
and it accepts connections from clients connecting to it, forking a
program to handle each connection.
.Pp
.Nm
accepts connections from clients to an already bound and listening
.Dv SOCK_STREAM
Unix domain socket which is its standard input.
.Pp
For every client connection to this socket, it forks.
The child sets some environment variables, then executes
.Ar prog...
with stdin reading from the socket and stdout writing to it.
.Pp
Depending on the verbosity level, it logs what it does to stderr.
.Pp
It runs until killed by a signal.
Depending on the received signal, it may kill its children before
exiting.
.Pp
Unlike his close cousin ipcserver,
.Nm
does not perform operations such as access control.
Those are delegated to the
.Xr s6-ipcserver-access 8
program.
.Pp
.Nm
can be used to set up
.Xr s6-local-service 7 Ns s .
.Pp
.Nm
is meant to be execve'd into by a program that gets the listening
socket.
That program is normally
.Xr s6-ipcserver-socketbinder 8 ,
which creates the socket itself; but it can be a different one if the
socket is to be retrieved by another means, for instance by fd-passing
from an fd-holding daemon
.Po
some people call this
.Dq socket activation
.Pc .
.Ss Signals
.Bl -tag -width x
.It SIGTERM
Exit.
.It SIGHUP
Send a SIGTERM and a SIGCONT to all children.
.It SIGQUIT
Send a SIGTERM and a SIGCONT to all children, then exit.
.It SIGABRT
Send a SIGKILL to all children, then exit.
.El
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl 1
Write a newline to stdout, and close stdout, right before entering the
client-accepting loop.
If stdout is suitably redirected, this can be used by monitoring
programs to check when the server is accepting connections.
See
.Xr s6-notifywhenup 7
for more information on readiness notification.
.It Fl v Ar verbosity
Be more or less verbose.
.Ar verbosity
can be 0 (quiet), 1 (normal), or 2 (verbose).
.It Fl P
Disable client credentials lookups.
The
.Ev IPCREMOTEEUID
and
.Ev IPCREMOTEEGID
environment variables will be unset in every instance of
.Ar prog... .
This is the portable option, because not every system supports
credential lookup across Unix domain sockets; but it is not as secure.
.It Fl p
Enable client credentials lookups.
This is the default; it works at least on Linux, Solaris, and *BSD
systems.
On systems that do not support it, every connection attempt will fail
with a warning message.
.It Fl c Ar maxconn
Accept at most
.Ar maxconn
concurrent connections.
Default is 40.
It is impossible to set it higher than 1000.
.It Fl C Ar localmaxconn
Accept at most
.Ar localmaxconn
connections from the same user ID.
Default is 40.
It is impossible to set it higher than
.Ar maxconn .
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
For each connection, an instance of
.Ar prog...
is spawned with the following variables set:
.Bl -tag -width x
.It PROTO
Always set to IPC.
.It IPCREMOTEEUID
Set to the effective UID of the client, unless credentials lookups
have been disabled.
.It IPCREMOTEEGID
Set to the effective GID of the client, unless credentials lookups
have been disabled.
.It IPCREMOTEPATH
Set to the path associated with the remote socket, if any.
Be aware that it may contain arbitrary characters.
.It IPCCONNNUM
Set to the number of connections originating from the same user
(i.e. same uid).
.El
.Pp
If client credentials lookup has been disabled,
.Ev IPCREMOTEEUID
and
.Ev IPCREMOTEEGID
will be set, but empty.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-accessrules-cdb-from-fs 8 ,
.Xr s6-accessrules-fs-from-cdb 8 ,
.Xr s6-connlimit 8 ,
.Xr s6-ioconnect 8 ,
.Xr s6-ipcclient 8 ,
.Xr s6-ipcserver 8 ,
.Xr s6-ipcserver-access 8 ,
.Xr s6-ipcserver-socketbinder 8
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-ipcserverd.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
