.Dd January 11, 2023
.Dt S6-INSTANCE-CREATE 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-instance-create
.Nd create a new instance of a currently supervised
.Xr s6-instanced-service 7
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl d | Fl D
.Op Fl P
.Op Fl f
.Op Fl t Ar timeout
.Ar servicedir
.Ar name
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
expects a running, supervised
.Xr s6-instanced-service 7
in
.Ar servicedir .
This service typically has been created by linking the result of an
.Xr s6-instance-maker 8
invocation into an existing
.Xr s6-scan-directory 7 .
.Pp
.Nm
creates a new instance of that service, named
.Ar name .
Depending on the given options, it may start it immediately, or keep
it down until a later
.Xr s6-instance-control 8
invocation.
.Pp
It waits for the new instance to be ready to take commands from
.Xr s6-instance-control 8
.Pp
It exits 0.
.Pp
.Nm
is similar to
.Xr s6-svlink 8 ,
because it uses the same underlying library functions.
Under the hood, an instance is a regular service running on a
supervision tree that is specific to the instanced service, and
.Nm
adds a service directory to that tree and ensures it gets
supervised.
.Pp
If the template for the service is logged, then
.Nm
will wait until supervisors have been spawned for both the instance
and its logger.
.Pp
.Nm
and
.Xr s6-instance-delete 8
are relatively expensive operations, because they have to recursively
copy or delete directories and use the
.Xr s6-ftrigr 7
synchronization mechanism with the instance supervisor, compared to
.Xr s6-instance-control 8
which only has to send commands to already existing supervisors.
If you are going to turn instances on and off on a regular basis, it
is more efficient to keep the instance existing and control it with
.Xr s6-instance-control 8
than it is to repeatedly create and delete it.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl d
Down.
The instance supervisor will be started, but the instance
itself will remain down.
Any
.Pa down
file for the instance will be deleted.
By default, if neither the
.Fl d
nor
.Fl D
options have been given, the supervisor auto-starts the instance as
soon as it runs.
.It Fl D
Down, and stay down.
The instance supervisor will be started, but the instance itself will
remain down.
A
.Pa down
file will be created for the instance.
By default, if neither the
.Fl d
nor
.Fl D
options have been given, the supervisor auto-starts the instance as
soon as it runs.
.It Fl P
Public.
Everyone will be able to subscribe to the instance supervisor's
notification.
By default, only processes running with the same gid as the instanced
service can subscribe to it.
.It Fl f
Force permissions.
You should never need to use this option, it is only there for testing
purposes.
.It Fl t Ar timeout
If the
instance supervisor has not started after
.Ar timeout
milliseconds,
.Nm
will print a message to stderr and exit 99.
By default,
.Ar timeout
is 0, which means no time limit.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width -x
.It 0
Success.
.It 99
Timeout while waiting for the instance supervisor to start.
.It 100
Wrong usage.
.It 111
System call failed.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-instanced-service 7 ,
.Xr s6-instance-control 8 ,
.Xr s6-instance-delete 8 ,
.Xr s6-instance-list 8 ,
.Xr s6-instance-maker 8 ,
.Xr s6-instance-status 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
