.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6-IPCCLIENT 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-ipcclient
.Nd UCSPI client tool[1] for Unix domain sockets: connect to a socket, then execute into a program
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl q | Q | v
.Op Fl p Ar localpath
.Op Fl l Ar localname
.Ar path
.Ar prog...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
connects to a Unix domain socket on
.Ar path .
.Pp
It executes into
.Ar prog...
with descriptor 6 reading from the socket and descriptor 7 writing to
it.
.Pp
.Nm
is mostly used to connect a client to an
.Xr s6-local-service 7
without having to implement networking in the client.
For instance, the
.Xr s6-sudo 8
program does this.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl q
Be quiet.
.It Fl Q
Be normally verbose.
This is the default.
.It Fl v
Be verbose.
.It Fl p Ar localpath
Bind the local socket to
.Ar localpath
before connecting to
.Ar path .
.It Fl l Ar localname
Use
.Ar localname
as the value of the
.Ev IPCLOCALPATH
environment variable.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Ar prog...
is run with the following variables set:
.Bl -tag -width x
.It PROTO
Always set to IPC.
.It IPCLOCALPATH
Set to the path associated with the local socket, if any.
Be aware that it may contain arbitrary characters.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-accessrules-cdb-from-fs 8 ,
.Xr s6-accessrules-fs-from-cdb 8 ,
.Xr s6-connlimit 8 ,
.Xr s6-ioconnect 8 ,
.Xr s6-ipcserver 8 ,
.Xr s6-ipcserver-access 8 ,
.Xr s6-ipcserver-socketbinder 8 ,
.Xr s6-ipcserverd 8
.Pp
[1]
.Lk https://cr.yp.to/proto/ucspi.txt
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-ipcclient.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
