.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6-IPCSERVER 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-ipcserver
.Nd UCSPI server tool[1] for Unix domain sockets, i.e. a super-server: accept connections from clients, and fork a program to handle each connection
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl 1
.Op Fl q | Q | v
.Op Fl d | D
.Op Fl P | p
.Op Fl a Ar perms
.Op Fl c Ar maxconn
.Op Fl C Ar localmaxconn
.Op Fl b Ar backlog
.Op Fl G Ar gidlist
.Op Fl g Ar gid
.Op Fl u Ar uid
.Op Fl U
.Ar path
.Ar prog...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
binds a Unix domain socket to
.Ar path .
.Pp
It can drop its root privileges.
.Pp
It closes its stdin and stdout.
.Pp
For every client connection to this socket, it forks.
The child sets some environment variables, then executes
.Ar prog...
with stdin reading from the socket and stdout writing to it.
.Pp
Depending on the verbosity level, it logs what it does to stderr.
.Pp
It runs until killed by a signal.
Depending on the received signal, it may kill its children before
exiting.
.Pp
.Nm
actually doesn't do any of this itself.
It is a wrapper, rewriting the command line and executing into a chain
of programs that perform those duties.
.Pp
Previous versions of
.Nm
were monolithic: it did the work of
.Xr s6-ipcserver-socketbinder 8 ,
.Xr s6-applyuidgid 8
and
.Xr s6-ipcserverd 8
itself.
The functionality has now been split into several different programs
because some service startup schemes require the daemon to get its
socket from an external program instead of creating and binding it
itself.
The most obvious application of this is upgrading a long-lived
process without losing existing connections.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl 1
Write a newline to stdout, before closing it, right after binding and
listening to the Unix socket.
If stdout is suitably redirected, this can be used by monitoring
programs to check when the server is ready to accept connections.
.It Fl q
Be quiet.
.It Fl Q
Be normally verbose.
This is the default.
.It Fl v
Be verbose.
.It Fl d
Allow instant rebinding to the same path even if it has been used not
long ago - this is the
.Dv SO_REUSEADDR
flag to
.Xr setsockopt 2
and is generally used with server programs.
This is the default.
Note that
.Ar path
will be deleted if it already exists at program start time.
.It Fl D
Disallow instant rebinding to the same path.
.It Fl P
Disable client credentials lookups.
The
.Ev IPCREMOTEEUID
and
.Ev IPCREMOTEEGID
environment variables will be unset in every instance of
.Ar prog... .
This is the portable option, because not every system supports
credential lookup across Unix domain sockets; but it is not as secure.
.It Fl p
Enable client credentials lookups.
This is the default; it works at least on Linux, Solaris, and *BSD
systems.
On systems that do not support it, every connection attempt will fail
with a warning message.
.It Fl c Ar maxconn
Accept at most
.Ar maxconn
concurrent connections.
Default is 40.
It is impossible to set it higher than 1000.
.It Fl C Ar localmaxconn
Accept at most
.Ar localmaxconn
connections from the same user ID.
Default is 40.
It is impossible to set it higher than
.Ar maxconn .
.It Fl b Ar backlog
Set a maximum of
.Ar backlog
backlog connections on the socket.
Extra connection attempts will rejected by the kernel.
.It Fl a Ar perms
Create the socket with permissions
.Ar perms ,
which is an octal number from 0000 to 0777.
Default is 0777, meaning everyone can connect to it.
0700 means only processes having the same uid as the
.Nm
process can connect to it.
.It Fl G Ar gidlist
Change
.Nm Ap
s supplementary group list to
.Ar gidlist
after binding the socket.
This is only valid when run as root.
.Ar gidlist
must be a comma-separated list of numerical group IDs.
.It Fl g Ar gid
Change
.Nm Ap
s groupid to
.Ar gid
after binding the socket.
This is only valid when run as root.
.It Fl u Ar uid
Change
.Nm Ap
s userid to
.Ar uid
after binding the socket.
This is only valid when run as root.
.It Fl U
Change
.Nm Ap
s user id, group id and supplementary group list according to the
values of the
.Ev UID ,
.Ev GID
and
.Ev GIDLIST
environment variables after binding the socket.
This is only valid when run as root.
This can be used with the
.Xr s6-envuidgid 8
program to easily script a service that binds to a privileged socket
then drops its privileges to those of a named non-root account.
.El
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
.Nm
parses the options and arguments it is given, and builds a new command
line with them.
It then executes into that new command line.
.Pp
The first program
.Nm s6-ipcserver
executes into is
.Xr s6-ipcserver-socketbinder 8 .
It will create and bind a Unix domain socket to
.Ar path ,
then execute into the rest of the command line.
.Pp
If a privilege-dropping operation has been requested, the program that
.Xr s6-ipcserver-socketbinder 8
executes into is
.Xr s6-applyuidgid 8 .
It will drop the root privileges, then execute into the rest of the
command line.
.Pp
The next program in the chain is
.Xr s6-ipcserverd 8 .
It is executed into by
.Xr s6-applyuidgid 8 ,
or directly by
.Xr s6-ipcserver-socketbinder 8
if no privilege-dropping operation has been requested.
.Xr s6-ipcserverd 8
is the long-lived process, the
.Dq daemon
itself, accepting connections from clients.
.Pp
For every client,
.Xr s6-ipcserverd 8
will spawn an instance of
.Ar prog... ,
the remainder of the command line.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-accessrules-cdb-from-fs 8 ,
.Xr s6-accessrules-fs-from-cdb 8 ,
.Xr s6-connlimit 8 ,
.Xr s6-ioconnect 8 ,
.Xr s6-ipcclient 8 ,
.Xr s6-ipcserver-access 8 ,
.Xr s6-ipcserver-socketbinder 8 ,
.Xr s6-ipcserverd 8
.Pp
[1]
.Lk https://cr.yp.to/proto/ucspi.txt
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-ipcserver.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
