.Dd January 11, 2023
.Dt S6-INSTANCE-DELETE 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-instance-delete
.Nd delete an existing instance of a currently supervised
.Xr s6-instanced-service 7
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl X
.Op Fl t Ar timeout
.Ar servicedir
.Ar name
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
expects a running, supervised
.Xr s6-instanced-service 7
in
.Ar servicedir ,
as well as an existing instance of this service named
.Ar name
(it doesn't matter if the instance is up or down).
.Pp
It deletes the
.Ar name
instance.
.Pp
It exits 0.
.Pp
.Nm
is similar to
.Xr s6-svunlink 8 ,
because it uses the same underlying library functions.
Under the hood, an instance is a regular service running on a
supervision tree that is specific to the instanced service, and
.Nm
removes a service directory from that tree.
.Pp
If the template for the service is logged, then
.Nm
will delete both the instance and its logger.
.Pp
.Nm
and
.Xr s6-instance-create 8
are relatively expensive operations, because they have to recursively
copy or delete directories and use the
.Xr s6-ftrigr 7
synchronization mechanism with the instance supervisor, compared to
.Xr s6-instance-control 8
which only has to send commands to already existing supervisors.
If you are going to turn instances on and off on a regular basis, it
is more efficient to keep the instance existing and control it with
.Xr s6-instance-control 8
than it is to repeatedly create and delete it.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl X
Don't wait.
.Nm
will exit right away, without waiting for the instance (and its
supervisor) to properly disappear.
.It Fl t Ar timeout
If the instance supervisor has not exited after
.Ar timeout
milliseconds,
.Nm
will still exit.
By default,
.Ar timeout
is 0, which means no time limit.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It 0
Success.
.It 100
Wrong usage.
.It 111
System call failed.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-instanced-service 7 ,
.Xr s6-instance-control 8 ,
.Xr s6-instance-create 8 ,
.Xr s6-instance-list 8 ,
.Xr s6-instance-maker 8 ,
.Xr s6-instance-status 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
