.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6-IPCSERVER-SOCKETBINDER 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-ipcserver-socketbinder
.Nd bind a Unix domain socket, then execute a program
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl d | D
.Op Fl b Ar backlog
.Op Fl M | m
.Op Fl a Ar perms
.Op Fl B
.Ar path
.Ar prog...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
creates a Unix domain socket and binds it to
.Ar path .
It prepares the socket to accept connections by calling
.Xr listen 2 .
.Pp
It then execs into
.Ar prog...
with the open socket as its standard input.
.Pp
The socket is provided
.Sy non-blocking by default .
.Pp
.Nm
is part of a set of basic blocks used to build a flexible Unix
super-server.
It normally should be given a command line crafted to make it execute
into
.Xr s6-ipcserverd 8
to accept connections from clients, or into a program such as
.Xr s6-applyuidgid 8
to drop privileges before doing so.
.Pp
The
.Xr s6-ipcserver 8
program does exactly this.
It implements a full Unix super-server by building a command line
starting with
.Nm
and ending with
.Xr s6-ipcserverd 8
followed by the application program, and executing into it.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl d
Allow instant rebinding to the same path even if it has been used not
long ago - this is the
.Dv SO_REUSEADDR
flag to
.Xr setsockopt 2
and is generally used with server programs.
This is the default.
Note that
.Ar path
will be deleted if it already exists at program start time.
.It Fl D
Disallow instant rebinding to the same path.
.It Fl b Ar backlog
Set a maximum of
.Ar backlog
backlog connections on the socket - extra connection attempts will
rejected by the kernel.
The default is
.Dv SOMAXCONN ,
i.e. the maximum number allowed by the system.
If backlog is 0, then the socket will be created, but it
.Sy will not be listening .
.It Fl M
The type of the socket will be
.Dv SOCK_STREAM .
This is the default.
.It Fl m
The type of the socket will be
.Dv SOCK_DGRAM .
Note that by default
.Dv SOCK_DGRAM
sockets are not connection-mode, and
.Xr listen 2
will fail - so you should always give the
.Fl b0
option to
.Nm
along with
.Fl m .
.It Fl a Ar perms
Create the socket with permissions
.Ar perms ,
which is an octal number from 0000 to 0777.
Default is 0777, meaning everyone can connect to it.
0700 means only processes having the same uid as the
.Nm
process can connect to it.
.It Fl B
The socket will be blocking.
The default is nonblocking.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-accessrules-cdb-from-fs 8 ,
.Xr s6-accessrules-fs-from-cdb 8 ,
.Xr s6-connlimit 8 ,
.Xr s6-ioconnect 8 ,
.Xr s6-ipcclient 8 ,
.Xr s6-ipcserver 8 ,
.Xr s6-ipcserver-access 8 ,
.Xr s6-ipcserverd 8
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-ipcserver-socketbinder.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
