.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6-PERMAFAILON 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-permafailon
.Nd read and analyse the death tally of a service (i.e. the recent process death events that happened), and if the death tally matches a given pattern, cause
.Em permanent failure
of the service, i.e. tells the supervisor not to try and restart it
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Ar secs
.Ar deathcount
.Ar events
.Ar prog...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is meant to be used in the
.Pa ./finish
script of a service directory supervised by
.Xr s6-supervise 8 .
.Pp
.Nm
must have the service directory of the tested service as its current
directory.
This is the default if it is called from the
.Pa finish
script of the service.
.Pp
It reads the death tally of the service, which is maintained by
.Xr s6-supervise 8 .
.Pp
If the supervised process has died at least
.Ar deathcount
times in the last
.Ar secs
seconds with a cause listed in
.Ar events ,
then
.Nm
exits 125.
Else
.Nm
execs into
.Ar prog... .
.Pp
.Ar events
is a comma-separated list of events.
An event can be one of the following:
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
An exit code, which is an integer between 0 and 255.
Example:
.Ql 1 .
.It
An exit code interval, which is two exit codes separated by a
dash.
Example:
.Ql 1-50 .
.It
A signal name, or a signal number preceded by
.Sq SIG .
Examples:
.Ql SIGTERM ,
.Ql sigabrt ,
.Ql sig11 .
.El
.Xr s6-supervise 8
detects when the
.Pa ./finish
script of its service exits 125, and stops respawning the service.
So, if the
.Pa ./finish
script is a chain-loading command line starting with a
.Nm
invocation (or containing such an invocation), when
.Nm
exits 125, then the
.Pa ./finish
script also exits 125 (because it is the same process), and the
service is then marked as failing permanently.
.Pp
The
.Pa ./finish
script is
.Em naturally
a chain-loading command line if it is written in the execline[1]
language.
It can also be made into a chain-loading command line from a shell
script by using
.Ql exec s6-permafailon secs deathcount events rest-of-chainloading-cmdline...
.Pp
Multiple invocations of
.Nm
can be chained, in order to test several death patterns.
.Pp
If a permanent failure is triggered and
.Ar secs
is high, it is possible that when the administrator manually launches
the service again, the next death triggers a permanent failure
again.
If this is not wanted, the administrator should clear the death tally
with the
.Xr s6-svdt-clear 8
command.
.Pp
The current death tally can be viewed via the
.Xr s6-svdt 8
command.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Dl s6-permafailon 60 5 1,101-103,SIGSEGV,SIGBUS prog...
.Pp
will exit 125 if the service has died 5 times in the last 60 seconds
with an exit code of 1, 101, 102 or 103, a SIGSEGV or a SIGBUS.
Else it will chainload into the
.Ql prog...
command line.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-notifyoncheck 8 ,
.Xr s6-supervise 8 ,
.Xr s6-svc 8 ,
.Xr s6-svdt 8 ,
.Xr s6-svdt-clear 8 ,
.Xr s6-svlisten 8 ,
.Xr s6-svlisten1 8 ,
.Xr s6-svok 8 ,
.Xr s6-svscan 8 ,
.Xr s6-svscanctl 8 ,
.Xr s6-svstat 8 ,
.Xr s6-svwait 8
.Pp
[1]
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/execline/
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-permafailon.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
