.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6-SVSCANCTL 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-svscanctl
.Nd send commands to a running
.Xr s6-svscan 8
process
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl zabhitqnN
.Ar scandir
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
sends the given series of commands to the
.Xr s6-svscan 8
process monitoring the
.Ar scandir
directory, then exits 0.
It exits 111 if it cannot send a command, or
100 if no
.Xr s6-svscan 8
process is running on
.Ar scandir .
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl a
Alarm.
.Xr s6-svscan 8
will immediately perform a scan of
.Ar scandir
to check for services.
.It Fl z
Destroy zombies.
Immediately triggers
.Xr s6-svscan 8 Ap
s reaper mechanism.
.It Fl b
Abort.
.Xr s6-svscan 8
will exec into its finishing procedure.
It will not kill any of the maintained
.Xr s6-supervise 8
processes, unless a
.Fl t
or
.Fl q
option is also present before the
.Fl b
option in the
.Nm
invocation.
.It Fl h
Reload configuration.
.Xr s6-svscan 8
will perform a scan, and destroy inactive services.
Equivalent to
.Fl an .
.Fl i
Equivalent to
.Fl t
below.
.It Fl t
Terminate.
.Xr s6-svscan 8
will send a
.Dv SIGTERM
to all the
.Xr s6-supervise 8
processes supervising a service and a
.Dv SIGHUP
to all the
.Xr s6-supervise 8
processes supervising a logger, then exec into its finish
procedure.
This means that services will be brought down but loggers will exit
naturally on EOF, and
.Xr s6-svscan 8
will wait for them to exit before exec'ing into
.Pa .s6-svscan/finish
or exiting itself: it's a clean shutdown with no loss of logs.
.It Fl q
Quit.
.Xr s6-svscan 8
will send all its
.Xr s6-supervise 8
processes a
.Dv SIGTERM ,
then exec into its finish procedure.
This is different from
.Fl t
in that services
.Em and
loggers will be forcibly killed, so the quit procedure may be faster
but in-flight logs may be lost.
.It Fl n
Nuke.
.Xr s6-svscan 8
will kill all the
.Xr s6-supervise 8
processes it has launched but that did not match a service directory
last time
.Ar scandir
was scanned, i.e. it prunes the supervision tree so that it matches
exactly what was in
.Ar scandir
at the time of the last scan.
A SIGTERM is sent to the
.Xr s6-supervise 8
processes supervising services and a SIGHUP is sent to the
.Xr s6-supervise 8
processes supervising loggers.
.It Fl N
Really nuke.
Does the same thing as
.Fl n ,
except that SIGTERM is sent to all the relevant
.Xr s6-supervise 8
processes, even if they are supervising loggers.
This is not recommended in a situation where you do not need to tear
down the supervision tree.
.El
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
.Nm
writes control commands into the
.Pa scandir/.s6-svscan/control
FIFO.
An
.Xr s6-svscan 8
process running on
.Ar scandir
will be listening to this FIFO, and will read and interpret those
commands.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-notifyoncheck 8 ,
.Xr s6-permafailon 8 ,
.Xr s6-supervise 8 ,
.Xr s6-svc 8 ,
.Xr s6-svdt 8 ,
.Xr s6-svdt-clear 8 ,
.Xr s6-svlisten 8 ,
.Xr s6-svlisten1 8 ,
.Xr s6-svok 8 ,
.Xr s6-svscan 8 ,
.Xr s6-svstat 8 ,
.Xr s6-svwait 8
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-svscanctl.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
