.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6-SVLINK 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-svlink
.Nd integrate service directories into an existing service manager sequence and eliminate race conditions
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl d | Fl D
.Op Fl P
.Op Fl f
.Op Fl t Ar timeout
.Ar scandir
.Ar servicedir
.Op Ar name
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
creates, in an
.Xr s6-scan-directory 7 ,
a symlink to an
.Xr s6-service-directory 7 ,
and notifies
.Xr s6-svscan 8
that a new service has been registered.
It waits until an
.Xr s6-supervise 8
supervisor process has been spawned to manage the new service, then exits.
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
.Nm
expects a running
.Xr s6-svscan 8
process on
.Ar scandir
and a fully functional, but unsupervised,
.Xr s6-service-directory 7
in
.Ar servicedir .
.It
It symlinks
.Ar servicedir
into
.Ar scandir .
The symbolic link is named
.Ar name ;
if no
.Ar name
argument has been given, the name given to the symbolic link is the
basename of
.Ar servicedir .
.It
It sends a command to
.Xr s6-svscan 8
to signal it that a new service is available.
.It
It waits for an
.Xr s6-supervise 8
process to be spawned on
.Ar servicedir .
.It
It exits 0.
.El
.Pp
Using
.Nm
to start services is a suboptimal pattern: it requires precise
manipulations involving use of
.Xr s6-ftrigrd 8
in order to avoid race conditions, so it is relatively expensive.
The simpler, more efficient pattern is to have all the supervisors
already started at boot time, so the existence of the supervisor can
be relied on, and starting the service becomes a trival and instant
operation - this is, for instance, how the s6-rc service manager[1]
behaves.
However, it can be difficult to implement this pattern with other
services managers such as OpenRC; in those cases,
.Nm ,
which starts the supervisors one at a time, can be used instead.
.Pp
If
.Ar servicedir
is logged, i.e.\&
.Ql Pa servicedir Ns /log
is also a valid service directory, then
.Nm
will wait until supervisors have been spawned for both the service and
its logger.
.Pp
.Nm
sends an
.Ql s6-svscanctl -a
command to
.Ar scandir ,
which means that the system's view of services will be refreshed.
Depending on what links exist in
.Ar scandir ,
other services than
.Ar servicedir
may also appear.
.Pp
The symmetrical program to
.Nm
is named
.Xr s6-svunlink 8 .
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl d
Down.
The supervisor will be started, but the service itself will remain down.
Any
.Ql Pa servicedir Ns /down
file will be deleted.
By default, if neither the
.Fl d
nor
.Fl D
options have been given, the supervisor auto-starts the service as
soon as it runs.
.It Fl D
Down, and stay down.
The supervisor will be started, but the service itself will remain down.
A
.Ql Pa servicedir Ns /down
file will be created.
By default, if neither the
.Fl d
nor
.Fl D
options have been given, the supervisor auto-starts the service as
soon as it runs.
.It Fl P
Public.
If
.Ql Pa servicedir Ns /event
does not exist, it will be created as public, i.e. anyone will be able
to subscribe to this
.Xr s6-fifodir 7 .
By default, it will be created as private, i.e. only processes running
with the same gid as the
.Xr s6-svscan 8
process will be able to subscribe to it.
.It Fl f
Force permissions.
The presence or absence of the
.Fl P
option (i.e. the public or private state of
.Ql Pa servicedir Ns /event )
will be enforced even if
.Ql Pa servicedir Ns /event
already exists.
By default,
.Nm
exits with an error message if
.Ql Pa servicedir Ns /event
exists and its public/private state mismatches what is requested.
.It Fl t Ar timeout
If the supervisor has not started after
.Ar timeout
milliseconds,
.Nm
will print a message to stderr and exit 99.
By default,
.Ar timeout
is 0, which means no time limit.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It 0
Success.
.It 99
Timeout while waiting for the supervisor to start.
.It 100
Wrong usage.
.It 111
System call failed.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-fifodir 7 ,
.Xr s6-scan-directory 7 ,
.Xr s6-service-directory 7 ,
.Xr s6-ftrigrd 8 ,
.Xr s6-supervise 8 ,
.Xr s6-svscan 8 ,
.Xr s6-svscanctl 8 ,
.Xr s6-svunlink 8
.Pp
[1]
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6-rc/
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-svlink.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
