.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6-SVSTAT 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-svstat
.Nd print a short, human-readable or programmatically parsable summary of the state of a process monitored by
.Xr s6-supervise 8
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl uwNrpest | o No up,wantedup,normallyup,ready,paused,pid,exitcode,signal,signum,updownsince,readysince,updownfor,readyfor
.Op Fl n
.Ar servicedir
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
gives information about the process being monitored at the
.Ar servicedir
.Xr s6-service-directory 7 ,
then exits 0.
.Pp
When
.Nm
is invoked without options, or with only the
.Fl n
option, it prints a human-readable summary of all the available
information on the service.
In this case, the
.Fl n
option instructs it to print a signal number (instead of a signal
name) if the supervised process was killed by a signal.
The summary includes the following data:
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
whether the process is up or down, and if it's up, the number of
seconds that it has been up.
.It
the process' pid, if it is up, or its last exit code or terminating
signal, if it is down.
.It
what its default state is, if it is different from its current state.
.It
the number of seconds since it last changed states.
.It
whether the service is ready
.Po
cf.
.Xr s6-notifywhenup 7
.Pc
as notified by the daemon itself, and if
it is, the number of seconds that it has been.
A service reported as down and ready simply means that it is ready to
be brought up.
A service is down and not ready when it is in the cleanup phase,
i.e. the
.Pa ./finish
script is still being executed.
.El
.Pp
When
.Nm
is invoked with one or several options other than
.Fl n ,
it outputs programmatically parsable information instead.
The output is a series of space-separated values, one value per
requested field.
The valid options are as follows.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl o Ar fields
List fields to print.
.Ar fields
is a list of comma-separated field names.
The valid field names are the following:
.Bl -tag -width x
.It up
Print
.Ql true
if the service is up and
.Ql false
if it is down.
.It wantedup
Print
.Ql true
if
.Xr s6-supervise 8
is currently instructed to (re)start the service when it is down, and
.Ql false
if
.Xr s6-supervise 8
is currently instructed to leave the service alone.
.It normallyup
Print
.Ql true
if the service is supposed to start when
.Xr s6-supervise 8
starts (i.e. no
.Pa ./down
file), and
.Ql false
if it is not (i.e. there is a
.Pa ./down
file).
.It ready
Print
.Ql true
if the service is ready, and
.Ql false
if it is not.
Note that
a service can be both down and ready: it simply means that it is ready
to be started (i.e. no
.Pa ./finish
script is currently running).
To check for service readiness, you should give this option along with
.Ql up :
the service is ready iff
.Ql s6-svstat -o up,ready
prints
.Ql true true .
(The
.Ql true true
case will never happen if the service does not support readiness
notification.)
.It paused
Print
.Ql true
if the service is paused (i.e. the process is currently stopped) and
.Ql false
if it is not.
It is a rare flag, you shouldn't normally need to use this option.
.It pid
Print the pid of the supervised process.
If the service is currently down,
.Ql -1
is printed instead.
.It exitcode
Print the exit code of the last execution of
.Pa ./run .
If the service is currently up, or the last
.Pa ./run
process was killed by a signal,
.Ql -1
is printed instead.
.It signal
Print the name of the signal the last
.Pa ./run
process was killed with.
If the service is currently up, or the last
.Pa ./run
process was not killed by a signal,
.Ql NA
is printed instead.
.It signum
Print the number of the signal the last
.Pa ./run
process was killed with.
If the service is currently up, or the last
.Pa ./run
process was not killed by a signal,
.Ql -1
is printed instead.
.It updownsince
Print a TAI64N[1] label representing the absolute date when the
service last changed states.
.It readysince
Print a TAI64N[1] label representing the absolute date when the
service last became ready.
Note that this can either mean
.Dq service readiness
(if the service is currently up and ready), or
.Dq down readiness ,
i.e. the last time when the service was down and ready to be started
(if the service is
.Em not
currently up and ready).
.It updownfor
Print the number of seconds that have elapsed since the service last
changed states.
.It readyfor
Print the number of seconds that have elapsed since the service last
became ready (or ready to be started if it's currently not up and
ready).
.El
.It Fl u
Equivalent to
.Ql -o up .
.It Fl w
Equivalent to
.Ql -o wantedup .
.It Fl N
Equivalent to
.Ql -o normallyup .
.It Fl r
Equivalent to
.Ql -o ready .
.It Fl p
Equivalent to
.Ql -o pid .
.It Fl e
Equivalent to
.Ql -o exitcode .
.It Fl s
Equivalent to
.Ql -o signal .
.It Fl t
Equivalent to
.Ql -o updownfor .
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It 0
Success.
.It 1
.Xr s6-supervise 8
not running on
.Ar servicedir .
.It 100
Wrong usage.
.It 111
System call failed.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Dl s6-svstat -o up,ready
.Pp
or its equivalent,
.Ql s6-svstat -ur ,
will print
.Ql true true
if the service is up and ready,
.Ql true false
if the service has been started but has not notified readiness yet,
.Ql false true
if it is down and can be started, and
.Ql false false
if it is down and there's a
.Pa ./finish
script running that needs to exit before the service can be restarted.
.Pp
.Dl s6-svstat -o pid,exitcode,signal
.Pp
or its equivalent,
.Ql s6-svstat -pes ,
will print
.Ql 42 -1 NA
if the service has been started and
.Pa ./run Ap
s pid is 42; it will print
.Ql -1 0 NA
if the service is down and
.Pa ./run
last exited 0; it will print
.Ql -1 -1 SIGTERM
if the service is down and
.Pa ./run
was last killed by a SIGTERM - as can happen, for instance, when you
down the service via a call to
.Ql s6-svc -d .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-notifyoncheck 8 ,
.Xr s6-permafailon 8 ,
.Xr s6-supervise 8 ,
.Xr s6-svc 8 ,
.Xr s6-svdt 8 ,
.Xr s6-svdt-clear 8 ,
.Xr s6-svlisten 8 ,
.Xr s6-svlisten1 8 ,
.Xr s6-svok 8 ,
.Xr s6-svscan 8 ,
.Xr s6-svscanctl 8 ,
.Xr s6-svwait 8
.Pp
[1]
.Lk https://cr.yp.to/libtai/tai64.html
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-svstat.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
