.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6-SVLISTEN1 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-svlisten1
.Nd run a program while listening on notifications from a supervised service, and block until said service goes up, or down
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl U | u | D | d | r | R
.Op Fl t Ar timeout
.Ar servicedir
.Ar prog...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
only waits for notifications; it never polls.
.Nm
checks the state of the
.Ar servicedir
.Xr s6-service-directory 7
and monitors its state changes.
.Pp
It spawns
.Ar prog...
as a child right after getting the initial state of the service.
.Pp
It then blocks until the wanted state happens.
.Pp
.Nm
is the service-specific version of
.Xr s6-ftrig-listen1 8 .
The point of
.Nm
is to use it to spawn a program such as
.Xr s6-svc 8 ,
in order to send signals to a service while making sure to catch its
state changes - thus avoiding the race condition that occurs when
running
.Xr s6-svc 8
then
.Xr s6-svwait 8
sequentially.
.Pp
The
.Xr s6-svlisten 8
program is an extension of
.Nm .
It can watch the state of several services at once; however, its
syntax makes it best used in execline[1] scripts only.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl u
Up.
.Nm
will wait until the service is up, as reported by
.Xr s6-supervise 8 .
This is the default; it is not reliable, but it does not depend on
specific support in the service programs.
See
.Xr s6-notifywhenup 7
for details.
.It Fl U
Really up.
.Nm
will wait until the service is up and ready as reported by the daemon
itself.
This requires specific support in the service programs, and the use of
the
.Pa notification-fd
file in the
.Xr s6-service-directory 7 .
See the explanation in
.Xr s6-notifywhenup 7 .
.It Fl d
Down.
.Nm
will wait until the service is down.
.It Fl D
Really down.
.Nm
will wait until the service is down and the cleanup script in
.Sm off
.Ar servicedir /
.Pa finish
.Sm on
has finished executing (or has timed out and been killed).
.It Fl r
Restart.
.Nm
will wait until the service has been started or restarted, i.e. they
have been in the down state, then the up state.
.It Fl R
Restart and ready.
.Nm
will wait until the service has been started or restarted and has
notified readiness.
.It Fl t Ar timeout
If the requested event has not happened after
.Ar timeout
milliseconds,
.Nm
will print a message to stderr and exit 99.
By default,
.Ar timeout
is 0, which means no time limit.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It 0
Success, the wanted state has been reached.
.It 1
The service was supposed to go up, but reported permanent failure.
.It 99
Timed out.
.It 100
Wrong usage.
.It 102
The
.Xr s6-supervise 8
process monitoring the service died.
.It 111
System call failed
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-notifyoncheck 8 ,
.Xr s6-permafailon 8 ,
.Xr s6-supervise 8 ,
.Xr s6-svc 8 ,
.Xr s6-svdt 8 ,
.Xr s6-svdt-clear 8 ,
.Xr s6-svlisten 8 ,
.Xr s6-svok 8 ,
.Xr s6-svscan 8 ,
.Xr s6-svscanctl 8 ,
.Xr s6-svstat 8 ,
.Xr s6-svwait 8
.Pp
[1]
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/execline/
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-svlisten1.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
