.Dd February 19, 2023
.Dt S6-SUPERVISE 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-supervise
.Nd monitor a long-lived process
.Po
or
.Em service
.Pc ,
making sure it stays alive, sending notifications to registered
processes when it dies, and providing an interface to control its
state
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Ar servicedir
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is designed to be the last non-leaf branch of a
.Em supervision tree ,
the supervised process being a leaf.
.Nm Ap
s behaviour is approximately the following:
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
.Nm
changes its current directory to
.Ar servicedir .
.It
It exits 100 if another
.Nm
process is already monitoring this service.
.It
It forks and executes the
.Pa ./run
file in the service directory.
.It
.Pa ./run
should be a long-lived process: it can chain load (i.e. exec into
other binaries), but should not die.
It's the daemon that
.Nm
monitors and manages.
.It
When
.Pa ./run
dies,
.Nm
spawns
.Pa ./finish ,
if it exists.
This script should be short-lived: it's meant to clean up application
state, if necessary, that has not been cleaned up by
.Pa ./run
itself before dying.
.It
When
.Pa ./finish
dies,
.Nm
spawns
.Pa ./run
again.
.It
.Nm
operation can be controlled by the
.Xr s6-svc 8
program.
It can be sent commands like
.Dq restart the service ,
.Dq bring the service down ,
etc.
.It
.Nm
normally runs forever.
If told to exit by
.Xr s6-svc 8 ,
it waits for the service to go down one last time, then exits 0.
.El
.Pp
For a precise description of
.Nm Ap
s behaviour, check the
.Sx Detailed operation
section below, as well as the
.Xr s6-service-directory 7
page:
.Nm
operation can be extensively configured by the presence of certain
files in the service directory.
.Ss Readiness notification support
If the
.Xr s6-service-directory 7
contains a valid
.Pa notification-fd
file when the service is started, or restarted,
.Nm
creates and listens to an additional pipe from the service for
readiness notification; refer to
.Xr s6-notifywhenup 7 .
When the notification occurs,
.Nm
updates the
.Pa ./supervise/status
file accordingly, then sends a
.Sq U
event to
.Pa ./event .
.Pp
If the service is logged, i.e. if the service directory has a
.Pa log
subdirectory that is also a service directory, and the
.Nm
process has been launched by that is also
.Xr s6-svscan 8 ,
then by default the service's stdout goes into the logging pipe.
If you set
.Pa notification-fd
to 1, the logging pipe will be overwritten by the notification pipe,
which is probably not what you want.
Instead, if your daemon writes a notification message to its stdout,
you should set
.Pa notification-fd
to (for instance) 3, and redirect outputs in your run script.
For instance, to redirect stderr to the logger and stdout to a
.Pa notification-fd
set to 3, you would start your daemon as
.Ql fdmove -c 2 1 fdmove 1 3 prog...
(in execline), or
.Ql exec 2>&1 1>&3 3<&- prog...
(in shell).
.Ss Signals
.Nm
reacts to the following signals:
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Dv SIGTERM
Bring down the service and exit, as if a
.Ql s6-svc -xd
command had been received.
.It Dv SIGHUP
Close its own stdin and stdout, and exit as soon as the service stops,
as if an
.Ql s6-svc -x
command had been received.
.It Dv SIGQUIT
Exit immediately without touching the service in any way.
.It Dv SIGINT
Send a
.Dv SIGINT
to the process group of the service, then exit immediately. (The point
here is to correctly forward
.Dv SIGINT
in the case where
.Nm
is running in a terminal and the user sent
.Ql ^C
to interrupt it.)
.El
.Ss Detailed operation
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
.Nm
switches to the
.Ar servicedir
.Xr s6-service-directory 7 .
.It
It creates a
.Pa supervise/
subdirectory (if it doesn't exist yet) to store its internal data.
.It
It exits 100 if another
.Nm
process is already monitoring this service.
.It
If the
.Pa ./event
.Xr s6-fifodir 7
does not exist,
.Nm
creates it and allows subscriptions to it from processes having the
same effective group id as the
.Nm
process.
If it already exists, it uses it as is, without modifying the
subscription rights.
.It
It sends an
.Sq s
event to
.Pa ./event .
.Po
Refer to
.Xr s6-ftrigw 7
.Pc
.It
If the default service state is up (i.e. there is no
.Pa ./down
file),
.Nm
spawns
.Pa ./run .
One argument is given to the
.Pa ./run
program:
.Ar servicedir ,
the name of the directory
.Nm
is being run on.
It is given exactly as given to s6-supervise, without
recanonicalization.
In particular, if
.Nm
is being managed by
.Xr s6-svscan 8 ,
.Ar servicedir
is always of the form
.Pa "" Ns Ar foo
or
.Pa "" Ns Ar foo Ns /log ,
and
.Ar foo
contains no slashes.
.It
.Nm
sends a
.Sq u
event to
.Pa ./event
whenever it successfully spawns
.Pa ./run .
.It
If there is a
.Pa ./notification-fd
file in the service directory and, at some point after the service has
been spawned,
.Nm
is told that the service is ready, it sends a
.Sq U
event to
.Pa ./event .
There are several ways to tell
.Nm
that the service is ready:
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
the daemon may do so itself; refer to
.Xr s6-notifywhenup 7 .
.It
the
.Pa run
script may have forked a
.Xr s6-notifyoncheck 8
process that polls the service for readiness.
.El
.It
When
.Pa ./run
dies,
.Nm
sends a
.Sq d
event to
.Pa ./event .
It then spawns
.Pa ./finish
if it exists.
.Pa ./finish
will have
.Pa ./run Ap
s exit code as first argument, or 256 if
.Pa ./run
was signaled; it will have the number of the signal that killed
.Pa ./run
as second argument, or an undefined number if
.Pa ./run
was not signaled; and it will have
.Ar servicedir
as third argument.
.It
By default,
.Pa ./finish
must exit in less than 5 seconds.
If it takes more than that,
.Nm
kills it with a SIGKILL.
This can be configured via the
.Pa ./timeout-finish
file, see the description in
.Xr s6-service-directory 7 .
.It
When
.Pa ./finish
dies (or is killed),
.Nm
sends a
.Sq D
event to
.Pa ./event .
Then it restarts
.Pa ./run
unless it has been told not to.
.It
If
.Pa ./finish
exits 125, then
.Nm
sends a
.Sq O
event to
.Pa ./event
before the
.Sq D ,
and it
.Sy does not restart the service ,
as if
.Ql s6-svc -O
had been called.
This can be used to signify permanent failure to start the service.
.It
There is a minimum 1-second delay between two
.Pa ./run
spawns, to avoid busylooping if
.Pa ./run
exits too quickly.
If the service has been
.Em ready
for more than one second, it will restart immediately, but if it is not
.Em ready
when it dies,
.Nm
will always pause for 1 second before spawning it again.
.It
When killed or asked to exit, it waits for the service to go down one
last time, then sends a
.Sq x
event to
.Pa ./event
before exiting 0.
.El
.Pp
Make sure to also check the
.Xr s6-service-directory 7
documentation page, for the full list of files that can be present in
a service directory and impact
.Nm Ap
s behaviour in any way.
.Pp
.Nm
is a long-lived process.
It normally runs forever, from the system's boot scripts, until
shutdown time; it should not be killed or told to exit.
If you have no use for a service, just turn it off; the
.Nm
process does not hurt.
.Pp
Even in boot scripts,
.Nm
should normally not be run directly.
It's better to have a collection of
.Xr s6-service-directory 7 Ns s
in a single
.Xr s6-scan-directory 7 ,
and just run
.Xr s6-svscan 8
on that scan directory.
.Xr s6-svscan 8
will spawn the necessary
.Nm
processes, and will also take care of logged services.
.Pp
.Nm
always spawns its child in a new session, as a session leader.
The goal is to protect the supervision tree from misbehaved services
that would send signals to their whole process group.
Nevertheless,
.Nm Ap
s handling of
.Dv SIGINT
ensures that its service is killed if you happen to run it in a
terminal and send it a
.Ql ^C .
.Pp
You can use
.Xr s6-svc 8
to send commands to the
.Nm
process; mostly to change the service state and send signals to the
monitored process.
.Pp
You can use
.Xr s6-svok 8
to check whether
.Nm
is successfully running.
.Pp
You can use
.Xr s6-svstat 8
to check the status of a service.
.Pp
.Nm
maintains internal information inside the
.Pa ./supervise
subdirectory of
.Ar servicedir .
.Ar servicedir
itself can be read-only, but both
.Sm off
.Ar servicedir
/supervise
.Sm on
and
.Sm off
.Ar servicedir
/event
.Sm on
need to be read-write.
.Pp
If
.Ar servicedir
isn't writable by
.Nm ,
for any reason, then the
.Xr s6-svc 8
.Fl D
and
.Fl U
commands will not work properly since
.Nm
will be unable to create or delete a
.Pa "" Ns Ar servicedir Ns /down
file; in this case
.Nm
will print a warning on stderr, and perform the equivalent of
.Fl d
or
.Fl u
instead
\(em
it will just be unable to change the permanent service configuration.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Nm
does not support options, because it is normally not run manually via
a command line; it is usually launched by its own supervisor,
.Xr s6-svscan 8 .
The way to tune
.Nm Ap
s behaviour is via files in the
.Xr s6-service-directory 7 .
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
.Nm
tries its best to stay alive and running despite possible system call
failures.
It will write to its standard error everytime it encounters a
problem.
However, unlike
.Xr s6-svscan 8 ,
it will not go out of its way to stay alive; if it encounters an
unsolvable situation, it will just die.
.Pp
Unlike other
.Dq supervise
implementations,
.Nm
is a fully asynchronous state machine.
That means that it can read and process commands at any time, even
when the machine is in trouble (full process table, for instance).
.Pp
.Nm
.Em does not use
.Xr malloc 3 .
That means it will
.Em never leak memory .
However,
.Nm s6-supervise
uses
.Xr opendir 3 ,
and most
.Xr opendir 3
implementations internally use heap memory - so unfortunately, it's
impossible to guarantee that
.Nm
does not use heap memory at all.
.Pp
.Nm
has been carefully designed so every instance maintains as little data
as possible, so it uses a very small amount of non-sharable memory.
It is not a problem to have several dozens of
.Nm
processes, even on constrained systems: resource consumption will be
negligible.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-notifyoncheck 8 ,
.Xr s6-permafailon 8 ,
.Xr s6-svc 8 ,
.Xr s6-svdt 8 ,
.Xr s6-svdt-clear 8 ,
.Xr s6-svlisten 8 ,
.Xr s6-svlisten1 8 ,
.Xr s6-svok 8 ,
.Xr s6-svscan 8 ,
.Xr s6-svscanctl 8 ,
.Xr s6-svstat 8 ,
.Xr s6-svwait 8
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-supervise.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
