.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6-SOCKLOG 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-socklog
.Nd minimal syslog daemon
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl d Ar notif
.Op Fl r
.Op Fl U | Fl u Ar uid Fl g Ar gid Fl G Ar gidlist
.Op Fl l Ar linelen
.Op Fl t Ar lameducktimeout
.Op Fl x Ar unixsocket | Fl i Ar ipport
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a reimplementation of the
.Xr socklog 8
program with a few more features.
.Pp
.Nm
reads datagrams from the
.Pa /dev/log
Unix domain socket, or from a Unix domain or Internet domain socket of
the user's choice, converts the encoded syslog facility and priority
names to their human-readable equivalents, and prints the logs to its
stdout.
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
.Nm
binds to
.Pa /dev/log .
.It
It drops its root privileges.
.It
For every datagram it reads, it turns its content into a log line:
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
Messages are truncated to 1024 characters.
.It
Trailing nulls or newlines are removed.
.It
Embedded nulls or newlines are converted to
.Ql ~
characters (tildes).
.It
A
.Ql syslogcode
at the beginning of the line is converted to
.Ql facility.priority:\ \& .
.El
.It
It prints the log line to its stdout, terminated by a newline.
.It
It exits 0 on a SIGTERM.
.El
.Ss Signals
.Nm
reacts to the following signals:
.Bl -tag -width x
.It SIGTERM
Exit as soon as possible.
.El
.Ss Typical use
.Nm
can be paired with
.Xr s6-log 8
to implement
.Ql syslogd
functionality.
.Nm
acts as the
.Em frontend :
it reads the log lines and processes them, then pipes them
to an
.Xr s6-log 8
instance that acts as the
.Em backend ,
i.e. sorts the log lines depending on regular expressions that
typically involve the facility and priority names, then stores them
into the filesystem.
.Pp
The pipe between
.Nm
and
.Xr s6-log 8
is typically a
.Em logging pipe
automatically provided by
.Xr s6-svscan 8
when the
.Xr s6-log 8
instance is declared as a logger service for the
.Nm
instance.
.Pp
The
.Pa examples/
subdirectory of the s6 package contains a turnkey
.Ql syslogd
service that implements this pattern.
.Pp
.Nm
cannot be used under
.Xr s6-ipcserver 8
or another super-server.
It does not implement the
.Sq socklog ucspi functionality ,
which is provided by the
.Xr ucspilogd 8
program instead.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl r
Raw logging.
.Ql <syslogcode>
codes will not be converted to facility/priority names.
.It Fl d Ar notif
When ready (actually bound to its socket), write a newline to file
descriptor
.Ar notif
then close it.
This allows
.Nm
to use the
.Xr s6-notifywhenup 7
mechanism to notify readiness.
.Ar notif
cannot be less than 3.
If this option is not given, no readiness notification is sent.
.It Fl u Ar uid
Drop user id to
.Ar id .
.It Fl g Ar gid
Drop group id to
.Ar gid .
.It Fl G Ar gidlist
Set supplementary group list to
.Ar gidlist ,
which must be given as a comma-separated list of numeric gids, without
spaces.
.It Fl U
Set user id, group id and supplementary group list to the values of
the
.Ev UID ,
.Ev GID
and
.Ev GIDLIST
environment variables.
If a
.Fl u ,
.Fl g
or
.Fl G
option is given after
.Fl U ,
the command line value overrides the environment variable.
.It Fl l Ar linelen
Set the maximum datagram size to
.Ar linelen .
Default is 1024.
It cannot be set to less than 80 or more than 1048576.
If a datagram is bigger than
.Ar linelen ,
it will be truncated to
.Ar linelen
characters, and the logged line will end with a
.Ql ...
ellipsis to show the truncation.
.It Fl t Ar lameducktimeout
On receipt of a
.Dv SIGTERM ,
give
.Nm
a grace period of
.Ar lameducktimeout
milliseconds to flush any log lines that are still in its buffer.
Default is 0, which means infinite: the program will only exit when
its buffer is empty, and may wait forever.
If
.Ar lameducktimeout
is nonzero and the timeout expires, the program will exit 99.
.It Fl x Ar unixsocket
Bind to a Unix domain socket at
.Ar unixsocket .
Default is
.Pa /dev/log .
.It Fl i Ar ipport
Bind to a UDP socket.
.Ar ipport
is a combination of
.Ar ip ,
which must be an IPv4 or IPv6 address, and
.Ar port ,
which must be an integer.
.Ar port
may be omitted, in which case it defaults to 514.
If
.Ar port
is given,
.Ar ip
and
.Ar port
must be separated by a
.Ql _
character (an underscore).
If
.Ar ip
is IPv4, a
.Ql \&:
(colon) can be used instead of an underscore.
When this option is used,
.Nm
will prepend every log line with
.Sq Ar clientip Ns _  Ns Ar clientport:\ \& ,
.Ar clientip
and
.Ar clientport
being the IP address and port of the client that sent the log
datagram.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It 0
.Dv SIGTERM
received, clean exit.
.It 99
.Dv SIGTERM
received but the buffer could not be flushed in time, some logs may be
lost.
.It 100
Wrong usage.
.It 111
System call failed.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-ipcserver 8 ,
.Xr s6-log 8 ,
.Xr s6-svscan 8 ,
.Xr socklog 8 ,
.Xr ucspilogd 8
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-socklog.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
