.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6-SOFTLIMIT 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-softlimit
.Nd change process limits, then execute into another program
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl a Ar allmem
.Op Fl c Ar core
.Op Fl d Ar data
.Op Fl f Ar fsize
.Op Fl l Ar lock
.Op Fl m Ar mem
.Op Fl o Ar ofiles
.Op Fl p Ar proc
.Op Fl r Ar res
.Op Fl s Ar stack
.Op Fl t Ar cpusecs
.Ar prog...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
parses its options and sets process (soft) resource limits accordingly.
.Pp
A value of
.Ql =
for any option means
.Dq set that limit to the hard limit .
.Pp
Depending on your operating system, an option may do nothing.
.Pp
When
.Nm
has modified all the limits successfully, it executes into
.Ar prog... .
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl a Ar allmem
Limit the total available memory to
.Ar allmem
bytes.
.It Fl c Ar core
Limit the core file size to
.Ar core
bytes.
.It Fl d Ar data
Limit the available heap memory to
.Ar data
bytes.
.It Fl f Ar fsize
Limit the file size to
.Ar fsize
bytes.
.It Fl l Ar lock
Limit the available locked memory to
.Ar lock
bytes.
.It Fl m Ar mem
Limit all types of memory to
.Ar mem
bytes.
.It Fl o Ar ofiles
Limit the number of open fds to
.Ar ofiles .
.It Fl p Ar proc
Limit the number of processes to
.Ar proc
(per user).
.It Fl r Ar res
Limit the available physical memory to
.Ar res
bytes.
.It Fl s Ar stack
Limit the available stack memory to
.Ar stack
bytes.
.It Fl t Ar cpusecs
Limit the available CPU time to
.Ar cpusecs
seconds.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-applyuidgid 8 ,
.Xr s6-envdir 8 ,
.Xr s6-envuidgid 8 ,
.Xr s6-fghack 8 ,
.Xr s6-setsid 8 ,
.Xr s6-setuidgid 8 ,
.Xr s6-tai64n 8 ,
.Xr s6-tai64nlocal 8
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-softlimit.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
