.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6-SVDT 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-svdt
.Nd print the recorded death tally of a service, i.e. a list of the times the process died, with the cause of death
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl S | s
.Op Fl n Ar maxlines
.Ar servicedir
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
prints the contents of the recorded death tally of the service being
currently supervised at the
.Ar servicedir
.Xr s6-service-directory 7 ,
then exits 0.
.Pp
For each recorded death,
.Nm
prints one line.
This line contains the following fields, separated with spaces:
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
A TAI64N[1] timestamp.
.It
The word
.Sq signal
if the death was caused by a signal, or the word
.Sq exitcode
if the death was a normal exit.
.It
The name of the signal that caused the death, or the exit code of the
process.
.El
.Pp
To obtain human-readable local time or GMT time instead of TAI64N
timestamps, simply pipe
.Nm Ap
s output into
.Xr s6-tai64nlocal 8 .
.Pp
Process deaths are recorded up to a default maximum of 100.
This default can be modified via the
.Pa max-death-tally
file in the
.Xr s6-service-directory 7 .
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl S
Print signal names.
This is the default.
.It Fl s
Print signal numbers.
The numerical value of the signal will be printed instead of the
signal name.
.It Fl n Ar maxlines
Limit the output to at most the latest
.Ar maxlines
deaths.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It 0
Success.
.It 100
Wrong usage.
.It 111
System call failed.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-notifyoncheck 8 ,
.Xr s6-permafailon 8 ,
.Xr s6-supervise 8 ,
.Xr s6-svc 8 ,
.Xr s6-svdt-clear 8 ,
.Xr s6-svlisten 8 ,
.Xr s6-svlisten1 8 ,
.Xr s6-svok 8 ,
.Xr s6-svscan 8 ,
.Xr s6-svscanctl 8 ,
.Xr s6-svstat 8 ,
.Xr s6-svwait 8
.Pp
[1]
.Lk https://cr.yp.to/daemontools/tai64n.html
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-svdt.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
