.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6-SUDOC 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-sudoc
.Nd talk to a peer
.Xr s6-sudod 8
program over a Unix socket, passing it command-line arguments,
environment variables and standard descriptors
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl e
.Op Fl t Ar timeoutconn
.Op Fl T Ar timeoutrun
.Op Ar args...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
transmits its standard input, standard output and standard error via
fd-passing over a Unix socket that must be open on its descriptors 6
and 7.
It expects an
.Xr s6-sudod 8
process to be receiving them on the other side.
.Pp
It also transmits its command-line arguments
.Ar args... ,
and also its environment by default.
Note that
.Xr s6-sudod 8
will not necessarily accept all the environment variables that
.Nm
tries to transmit.
.Pp
.Nm
waits for the server program run by
.Xr s6-sudod 8
to finish.
It exits the same exit code as the server program.
If the server program is killed by a signal,
.Nm
kills itself with the same signal.
.Pp
If
.Nm
is killed, or exits after
.Ar timeoutrun
milliseconds, while the server program is still running,
.Xr s6-sudod 8
will send a SIGTERM and a SIGCONT to the server program - but this
does not guarantee that it will die.
If the server program keeps running, it might still read from the file
that was
.Nm Ap
s stdin, or write to the files that were
.Nm Ap
s stdout or stderr.
.Sy This is a potential security risk.
Administrators should audit their server programs to make sure this
does not happen.
.Pp
More generally, anything using signals or terminals will not be
handled transparently by the
.Nm
+
.Xr s6-sudod 8
mechanism.
The mechanism was designed to allow programs to gain privileges in
specific situations: short-lived, simple, noninteractive processes.
It was not designed to emulate the full suid functionality and will
not go out of its way to do so.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl e
Do not attempt to transmit any environment variables to
.Xr s6-sudod 8 .
.It Fl t Ar timeoutconn
If
.Xr s6-sudod 8
has not managed to process the given information and start the server
program after
.Ar timeoutconn
milliseconds, give up.
By default,
.Ar timeoutconn
is 0, meaning infinite.
Note that there is no reason to set up a nonzero
.Ar timeoutconn
with a large value:
.Xr s6-sudod 8
is not supposed to block.
The option is only there to protect against ill-written services.
.It Fl T Ar timeoutrun
If the server program has not exited after
.Ar timeoutrun
milliseconds, give up.
By default,
.Ar timeoutrun
is 0, meaning infinite.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-sudo 8 ,
.Xr s6-sudod 8
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-sudoc.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
