.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6-SUDOD 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-sudod
.Nd receive command-line arguments, environment variables and standard descriptors from a peer
.Xr s6-sudoc 8
program over a Unix socket, then fork another program
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl 0
.Op Fl 1
.Op Fl 2
.Op Fl d
.Op Fl t Ar timeout
.Op Ar sargv...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
gets 3 file descriptors via fd-passing over a Unix socket that must be
open on its descriptors 0 and 1.
(The received descriptors will be the stdin, stdout and stderr of the
server program.)
It expects an
.Xr s6-sudoc 8
process to be sending them on the client side.
.Pp
It also receives a list of command-line arguments
.Ar cargv... ,
and an environment
.Ar clientenv .
.Nm
forks and executes
.Ar sargv... cargv... .
The client command line is appended to the server command line.
.Nm
waits for its child to exit and transmits its exit code to the peer
.Xr s6-sudoc 8
process.
It then exits 0.
.Pp
If the
.Fl d
option to
.Nm
has not been given, and
.Xr s6-sudoc 8
is killed (or exits after
.Ar timeoutrun
milliseconds) while the server program is still running,
.Nm
will send a SIGTERM and a SIGCONT to its child, then exit 1.
However, sending a SIGTERM to the child does not guarantee that it
will die; and if it keeps running, it might still read from the file
that was
.Xr s6-sudoc 8 Ap
s stdin, or write to the files that were
.Xr s6-sudoc 8 Ap
s stdout or stderr.
.Sy This is a potential security risk.
Administrators should audit their server programs to make sure this
does not happen.
.Pp
More generally, anything using signals or terminals will not be
handled transparently by the
.Xr s6-sudoc 8
+
.Nm
mechanism.
The mechanism was designed to allow programs to gain privileges in
specific situations: short-lived, simple, noninteractive processes.
It was not designed to emulate the full suid functionality and will
not go out of its way to do so.
.Pp
Administrators should also make sure that it's not a problem if
.Nm Ap
s child keeps running after the
.Xr s6-sudoc 8
client exits, if they have given the
.Fl d
option to
.Nm .
In particular, they should study what happens if another connection to
the same service occurs while an instance is still running.
.Pp
.Ar sargv
may be empty.
In that case, the client is in complete control of the command line
executed as
.Va serveruser .
This setup is permitted by
.Nm ,
but it is very dangerous, and extreme attention should be paid to the
construction of the
.Xr s6-ipcserver-access 8
rules.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl 0
Do not inherit stdin from
.Xr s6-sudoc 8 .
The child will be run with its stdin pointing to
.Pa /dev/null
instead.
.It Fl 1
Do not inherit stdout from
.Xr s6-sudoc 8 .
The child will be run with its stdout pointing to
.Pa /dev/null
instead.
.It Fl 2
Do not inherit stderr from
.Xr s6-sudoc 8 .
The child will be run with its stderr being a copy of
.Nm Ap
s stderr instead.
(This is useful to still log the child's error messages without
sending them to the client.)
.It Fl d
Detach.
The child will keep running until it naturally exits, even if the
client disconnects.
Setting this option also enforces
.Fl 0 ,
.Fl 1
and
.Fl 2 .
Bear in mind that this option relinquishes a lot of control over the
child, and administrators should make sure it is appropriately
short-lived.
.It Fl t Ar timeout
If
.Nm
has not received all the needed data from the client after
.Ar timeout
milliseconds, it will exit without spawning a child.
By default,
.Ar timeout
is 0, meaning infinite.
This mechanism exists to protect the server from malicious or buggy
clients that would uselessly consume resources.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Nm
transmits its own environment to its child, plus the environment sent
by
.Xr s6-sudoc 8 ,
filtered in the following manner: for every variable sent by
.Xr s6-sudoc 8 ,
if the variable is
.Sy present but empty
in
.Nm Ap
s environment, then its value is overridden by the value given by
.Xr s6-sudoc 8 .
A variable that is already nonempty, or that doesn't exist, in
.Nm Ap
s environment, will not be transmitted to the child.
In other words:
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
If there's no variable
.Va X
in
.Nm Ap
s environment, the child will have no variable
.Va X
defined.
.It
If there's a non-empty variable
.Va X
in
.Nm Ap
s environment, the child will inherit that variable, with its value,
from
.Nm .
.It
If there's an empty variable
.Va X
in
.Nm Ap
s environment, and
.Xr s6-sudoc 8
transmits variable
.Va X ,
then the child will inherit that variable with the value from
.Xr s6-sudoc 8 .
(If
.Xr s6-sudoc 8
does not transmit
.Va X ,
the variable will be present, but empty, in the child's environment.)
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
The typical use of
.Nm
is in a local service with a
.Xr s6-ipcserver 8
process listening on a Unix socket, an
.Xr s6-ipcserver-access 8
process performing client authentication and access control, and
possibly an
.Xr s6-envdir 8
process setting up the environment variables that will be accepted by
.Nm .
The following script, meant to be a run script in a service directory,
will set up a privileged program:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
#!/command/execlineb -P
fdmove -c 2 1
fdmove 1 3
s6-envuidgid serveruser
s6-ipcserver -U -1 -- serversocket
s6-ipcserver-access -v2 -l0 -i rules --
exec -c
s6-envdir env
s6-sudod
sargv
.Ed
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
.Xr execlineb 1
executes the script.
.It
.Xr fdmove 1
makes sure the script's error messages are sent to the service's
logger.
.It
.Xr fdmove 1
redirects the script's stdout to file descriptor 3. This is useful if
the service directory contains a
.Pa notification-fd
file containing 3, so the daemon can perform readiness notification
.Po
cf.
.Xr s6-notifywhenup 7
.Pc
by writing a newline to its stdout.
(The
.Fl 1
option to
.Xr s6-ipcserver 8
tells it to do this.)
.It
.Xr s6-envuidgid 8
sets the
.Ev UID ,
.Ev GID
and
.Ev GIDLIST
environment variables for
.Xr s6-ipcserver 8
to interpret.
.It
.Xr s6-ipcserver 8
binds to
.Va serversocket ,
drops its privileges to those of
.Va serveruser ,
and announces its readiness.
Then, for every client connecting to
.Va serversocket :
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
.Xr s6-ipcserver-access 8
checks the client's credentials according to the rules in directory
.Va rules .
.It
.Ql exec -c
.Po
cf.\&
.Xr exec 1
.Pc
clears the environment.
.It
.Xr s6-envdir 8
sets environment variables according to the directory
.Va env .
You can make sure that a variable
.Va VAR
will be present but empty by performing
.Ql echo > env/ Ns Va VAR .
(A single newline is interpreted by
.Xr s6-envdir 8
as an empty variable; whereas if
.Pa env/VAR
is totally empty, then the
.Va VAR
variable will be removed from the environment.)
.It
.Nm
reads a command line
.Ar cargv ,
a client environment and file descriptors over the socket.
.It
.Nm
spawns
.Ar sargv cargv .
.El
.Pp
(Actually,
.Xr s6-ipcserver 8
does not do this itself: it executes into other programs that each do
one of the tasks.
But for our example, it does not matter.)
.El
.Pp
This means that user
.Va clientuser
running
.Ql s6-sudo Va serversocket Ar cargv
will be able, if authorized by the configuration in
.Va rules ,
to run
.Ar sargv cargv
as user
.Va serveruser ,
with stdin, stdout, stderr and the environment variables properly
listed in
.Va env
transmitted to
.Ar sargv .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr exec 1 ,
.Xr execlineb 1 ,
.Xr fdmove 1 ,
.Xr s6-sudo 8 ,
.Xr s6-sudoc 8
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-sudod.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
