.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6-SVPERMS 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-svperms
.Nd allows the user to see, or modify, for a given
list of services: who can read their states, who can send them control
commands, and who can subscribe to up/down events for those services
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl v
.Op Fl u | Fl g Ar group | Fl G Ar group | Fl o | Fl O Ar group
.Op Fl e | Fl E Ar group
.Ar servicedirs...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Without options, or with only the
Fl v
option,
.Nm
prints 3 lines to stdout for every service directory listed in
.Ar servicedirs .
Every line contains the name of the service directory, then the
following information:
.Bl -tag -width x
.It status:
Indicates who is allowed to read status information on the service,
with commands such as
.Xr s6-svstat 8
or
.Xr s6-svdt 8 .
The values can be
.Ql owner ,
for only the owner of the service;
.Ql group: Ns Ar name ,
for the owner and members of group
.Ar name ;
or
.Ql public ,
for all users.
.It control:
Indicates who is allowed to send control commands to the service, with
commands such as
.Xr s6-svc 8 .
The values can be
.Ql owner ,
for only the owner of the service; or
.Ql group: Ns Ar name ,
for the owner and members of group
.Ar name .
.It events:
Indicates who is allowed to subscribed to events sent by
.Xr s6-supervise 8
for this service, with commands such as
.Xr s6-svwait 8
or
.Xr s6-svlisten1 8 .
The values can be
.Ql group: Ns Ar name ,
for the owner and members of group
.Ar name ;
or
.Ql public ,
for all users.
.El
.Pp
If something goes wrong while reading a part of the configuration of a
service directory,
.Nm
does not print the corresponding line to stdout; instead, it prints a
warning message to stderr.
.Pp
When invoked with other options,
.Nm
modifies the permissions of the service directories listed in
.Ar servicedirs...
as specified by the options.
The same permissions will be applied to all the services listed in
.Ar servicedirs... .
.Pp
The default (restrictive) permissions are safe.
.Pp
Unless operation of a service is restricted information, it is also
safe to make
.Ql status\&:
more permissive.
.Pp
Opening
.Ql control\&:
to a group can be useful for instance in a shared administration
situation when individual administrators are not given full root
powers.
.Pp
Making
.Ql events\&:
public bears a small risk of a local DoS attack preventing more
subscriptions to events, so it is not recommended for supervision
trees where such subscriptions are critical to operations - such as a
set of root services managed by s6-rc[1].
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl v
Re-read the permissions after writing them, and print them to stdout.
.It Fl u
Restrict the
.Ql status\&:
and
.Ql control\&:
permissions to
.Ql owner :
only the owner of a service directory will be able to read its state
or control the service.
This is the default when
.Xr s6-supervise 8
starts a service for the first time.
.It Fl g Ar group
Allow members of group
.Ar group
to read the status of the service, but not to control it - control
will be restricted to the owner.
.It Fl G Ar group
Allow members of group
.Ar group
to read
.Em and
control the service.
.It Fl o
Allow everyone to read the status of the service, but restrict
.Ql control\&:
to the owner.
.It Fl O Ar group
Allow everyone to read the status, and allow members of group
.Ar group
to control the service.
.It Fl e
Allow everyone to subscribe to events.
.It Fl E Ar group
Only allow members of group
.Ar group
to subscribe to events.
This is the default when
.Xr s6-supervise 8
starts a service for the first time, with
.Ar group
being the primary group of the
.Xr s6-supervise 8
process
.Po
most likely
.Ql root
.Pc .
.El
.Pp
.Ar group
is normally a group name that will be searched in the group
database.
But if it starts with a colon
.Po
.Ql \&:
.Pc ,
the rest of
.Ar group
will be interpreted as a numerical gid, and the group database will
not be read.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It 0
Success.
.It 1
Something went wrong when reading permissions in one of the service directories.
.It 100
Wrong usage.
.It 111
System call failed.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
[1]
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6-rc/
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-svperms.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
