.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6-SETSID 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-setsid
.Nd run a program as a new session leader, or in a new foreground or background process group
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl s | b | f | g
.Op Fl i | I | q
.Op Fl d Ar ctty
.Ar prog...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
creates a new session, or a new process group, and may make that
process group the foreground process group, depending on the options
it is run with.
.Pp
As session leader or process group leader,
.Nm
then executes into
.Ar prog... .
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl s
Session.
.Nm
will try and execute
.Ar prog
as a session leader.
This is the default.
.It Fl b
Background process group.
.Nm
will not create a new session, but will create a new process group,
and try and execute
.Ar prog
as the new process group leader.
.It Fl f
Foreground process group.
.Nm
will not create a new session, but will create a new process group and
attach its session's controlling terminal to the new process group
before executing
.Ar prog .
However, the new process group will likely be stopped, waiting for the
former foreground process group to relinquish the controlling
terminal, and will need to be sent a SIGCONT to resume.
To avoid that, use the next option.
.It Fl g
Grab terminal.
.Nm
will not create a new session, but will create a new process group and
attach its session's controlling terminal to the new process group
before executing
.Ar prog .
It will forcefully grab the controlling terminal from the former
foreground process group: a process belonging to that former
foreground process group will be stopped if it attempts to read from
or write to that terminal.
.It Fl i
Strict.
If
.Nm
cannot perform the operations it needs, it will exit 111 with an error
message.
.It Fl I
Loose.
If
.Nm
cannot perform the operations, it will print a warning message, but
exec into
.Ar prog
nonetheless.
This is the default.
.It Fl q
Silent.
.Nm
will not print any warning message; it will exec into
.Ar prog
even if it cannot perform the operations.
.It Fl d Ar ctty
Assume file descriptor number
.Ar ctty
is the controlling terminal for the current session.
Default is 0.
This is only useful when used with the
.Fl f
or
.Fl g
options.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-applyuidgid 8 ,
.Xr s6-envdir 8 ,
.Xr s6-envuidgid 8 ,
.Xr s6-fghack 8 ,
.Xr s6-setuidgid 8 ,
.Xr s6-softlimit 8 ,
.Xr s6-tai64n 8 ,
.Xr s6-tai64nlocal 8
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-setsid.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
