.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6-SVWAIT 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-svwait
.Nd monitor one or more
.Xr s6-service-directory 7 Ns s
given as its arguments, waiting for a state (ready, up or down) to
happen
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl U | u | D | d | r | R
.Op Fl a | o
.Op Fl t Ar timeout
.Ar servicedir...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
only waits for notifications; it never polls.
.Pp
.Nm
should be given one or more
.Em service directories
as arguments, not an
.Xr s6-scan-directory 7 .
If you need to wait for a whole scan directory, give all its contents
as arguments to
.Nm s6-svwait .
.Pp
.Nm
will only work on service directories that are already active,
i.e. have an
.Xr s6-supervise 8
process running on them.
It will not work on a service directory where
.Xr s6-supervise 8
has not been started yet.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl u
Up.
.Nm
will wait until the services are up, as reported by
.Xr s6-supervise 8 .
This is the default; it is not reliable, but it does not depend on
specific support in the service programs.
See
.Xr s6-notifywhenup 7
for details.
.It Fl U
Really up.
.Nm
will wait until the services are up and ready as reported by the
services themselves.
This requires specific support in the service programs, and the use of
the
.Pa notification-fd
file in the
.Xr s6-service-directory 7 .
See the explanation in
.Xr s6-notifywhenup 7 .
.It Fl d
Down.
.Nm
will wait until the services are down.
.It Fl D
Really down.
.Nm
will wait until the services are down and the cleanup scripts in
.Sm off
.Ar servicedir /
.Pa finish
.Sm on
for every
.Ar servicedir
have finished executing (or have timed out and been killed).
.It Fl r
Restart.
.Nm
will wait until the services are down, then until they are up.
If the
.Fl o
option is given, it waits until
.Em all
services are down and
.Em one
service is up; otherwise it waits until
.Em all
the services have restarted.
.It Fl R
Restart and ready.
.Nm
will wait until the services are down, then until they are up and
ready.
If the
.Fl o
option is given, it waits until
.Em all
services are down and
.Em one
service is up and ready; otherwise it waits until
.Em all
the services have restarted and are ready.
.It Fl o
Or.
.Nm
will wait until
.Em one
of the given services comes up or down.
.It Fl a
And.
.Nm
will wait until
.Em all
of the given services come up or down.
This is the default.
.It Fl t Ar timeout
If the requested events have not happened after timeout milliseconds,
.Nm
will print a message to stderr and exit 99.
By default,
.Ar timeout
is 0, which means no time limit.
.El
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
.Nm
spawns an
.Xr s6-ftrigrd 8
child to listen to notifications sent by
.Xr s6-supervise 8 .
It also checks
.Pa supervise/status
files to get the current service states, so it is immune to race
conditions.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It 0
Success, the wanted state has been reached.
.It 99
Timed out.
.It 100
Wrong usage.
.It 102
The
.Xr s6-supervise 8
process monitoring the service died.
.It 111
System call failed.
.It Em n
Services were expected to come up, but
.Em n
of them reported permanent failure.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-notifyoncheck 8 ,
.Xr s6-permafailon 8 ,
.Xr s6-supervise 8 ,
.Xr s6-svc 8 ,
.Xr s6-svdt 8 ,
.Xr s6-svdt-clear 8 ,
.Xr s6-svlisten 8 ,
.Xr s6-svlisten1 8 ,
.Xr s6-svok 8 ,
.Xr s6-svscan 8 ,
.Xr s6-svscanctl 8 ,
.Xr s6-svstat 8
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-svwait.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
