.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6-SVUNLINK 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-svunlink
.Nd integrate service directories into an existing service manager sequence and eliminate race conditions
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl X
.Op Fl t Ar timeout
.Ar scandir
.Ar name
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
unlinks an
.Xr s6-service-directory 7
from an
.Xr s6-scan-directory 7 ,
then notifies
.Xr s6-svscan 8
that a service has been unregistered.
It waits until the
.Xr s6-supervise 8
supervisor process managing the service has disappeared, then exits.
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
.Nm
expects a running
.Xr s6-svscan 8
process on
.Ar scandir
and a fully functional supervised service on the
.Xr s6-service-directory 7
in
.Ql Ar scandir Ns / Ns Ar name ,
which must be a symbolic link to a real directory located somewhere
else.
.It
It deletes the
.Ql Ar scandir Ns / Ns Ar name
symlink.
.It
It sends a command to
.Xr s6-svscan 8
to signal it that a service has disappeared.
.It
It waits for the
.Xr s6-supervise 8
process managing the service directory to exit.
.It
It exits 0.
.El
.Pp
Using
.Nm
to stop services is a suboptimal pattern: starting and stopping
supervisors is a heavier operation than just stopping services.
The simpler, more efficient pattern is to simply perform
.Ql s6-svc -dwD Ar scandir Ns / Ns Ar name ,
which only commands, and waits for, the death of the service, without
impacting the supervisor.
Nevertheless, for symmetry with
.Xr s6-svlink 8 ,
this program is provided.
.Pp
.Nm
is a destructor; as is, it returns 0 even in situations that are
nominal failures.
For instance, it returns 0 even if its timeout expires; the rationale
is that there is no sensible action for the user to do if this error
is reported.
.Nm
only reports errors when they uncover a deeper problem in the system.
.Pp
.Nm
sends a
.Ql s6-svscanctl -an
command to
.Ar scandir ,
which means that the system's view of services will be refreshed and
inactive services will be killed and unsupervised.
Depending on what links exist in
.Ar scandir ,
new services may appear, and other services than
.Ar name
may disappear.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl X
Don't wait.
.Nm
will exit right away, without waiting for the supervisor to exit first.
.It Fl t Ar timeout
If the supervisor has not exited after
.Ar timeout
milliseconds,
.Nm
will still exit.
The default is 0, meaning no time limit.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It 0
Success.
.It 100
Wrong usage.
.It 111
System call failed.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-scan-directory 7 ,
.Xr s6-service-directory 7 ,
.Xr s6-supervise 8 ,
.Xr s6-svlink 8 ,
.Xr s6-svscan 8
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-svunlink.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
