.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6-TAI64NLOCAL 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6-tai64nlocal
.Nd read from stdin and write to stdout, replacing every line beginning with a TAI64N timestamp[1] with a human-readable local date and time
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl g
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
exits 0 when it sees the end of stdin.
If there's an unfinished line,
.Nm
processes it and writes it before exiting.
.Pp
The typical use case of
.Nm
is to read files that have been filtered through
.Xr s6-tai64n 8 ,
or log files that have been produced by
.Xr s6-log 8
with the
.Fl t
option.
For instance, to read the latest httpd logs with human-readable
timestamps,
.Ql s6-tai64nlocal < /var/log/httpd/current | less
is a possible command.
.Pp
.Nm
does neither
.Dq line buffering
nor
.Dq block buffering .
It does optimal buffering, i.e. it flushes its output buffer every
time it risks blocking on input.
.Pp
If
.Nm
does not appear to give the correct local time:
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
Check the compilation options that were used for the skalibs[2] libraries
your
.Nm s6-tai64nlocal
program was linked against.
In particular, check whether the
.Ql --enable-tai-clock
or
.Ql --enable-right-tz
configure options have been given.
.It
Compare these flags and their meanings with your current timezone.
In particular, check
.Pa /etc/localtime ,
.Pa /etc/timezone ,
.Pa /etc/TZ ,
and the
.Ev TZ
environment variable.
.El
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl g
Print GMT time instead of local time.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-applyuidgid 8 ,
.Xr s6-envdir 8 ,
.Xr s6-envuidgid 8 ,
.Xr s6-fghack 8 ,
.Xr s6-setsid 8 ,
.Xr s6-setuidgid 8 ,
.Xr s6-softlimit 8 ,
.Xr s6-tai64n 8
.Pp
[1]
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/skalibs/libstddjb/tai.html#timestamp
.Pp
[2]
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/skalibs/
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/s6-tai64nlocal.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
