.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt S6LOCKD 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm s6lockd
.Nd
.Xr s6-s6lock 7
daemon which manages a set of lock files in a given directory, and
associated timeouts
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
does not fork, does not background itself automatically, and does not
use syslog.
It is not meant to be run directly by the user: it will be spawned by
the
.Xr s6-s6lock 7
client library.
.Pp
There are two ways to use
.Nm :
.Bl -enum -width x
.It
Use the
.Fn s6lock_startf
library call.
An
.Nm
child will then be spawned from your calling process, and
automatically reaped when you call
.Fn s6lock_end .
It requires care with applications that trap SIGCHLD.
It also requires care with lock file permissions: an
.Nm
instance might not be able to open a lock file created by a former
instance run by another client with different permissions.
.It
Use the
.Fn s6lock_start
library call, together with an
.Nm
.Xr s6-local-service 7 .
For once,
.Em this is the recommended setup :
.Nm
creates empty lock files, and having all
.Nm
instances run under the same user simplifies permissions management
considerably.
.El
.Pp
When run as a service,
.Nm
has no
.Dq standalone
mode: it is designed to work with a Unix domain super-server, like
.Xr s6-ipcserver 8 .
.Nm
follows the UCSPI[1] interface; it can be directly executed from the
super-server.
.Pp
Unix does not natively provide a way to stop blocking on a lock
acquisition after a timeout.
To emulate such behaviour,
.Nm
actually spawns an
.Xr s6lockd-helper 8
child per requested lock.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-setlock 8 ,
.Xr s6lockd-helper 8
.Pp
[1]
.Lk https://cr.yp.to/proto/ucspi.txt
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/libs6/s6lockd.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
