.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt UCSPILOGD 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ucspilogd
.Nd convert syslog facility numbers and alert levels into names
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl d Ar undef
.Op Ar var ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
reads a stream of syslog-like messages on stdin.
Those messages can be newline-terminated or null-terminated.
.Pp
For every line it reads: if it has been given
.Ar var
arguments, it writes the value of every
.Ar var
environment variable, followed by a colon and a space.
.Pp
If the line begins with a syslog facility number and/or alert level in
the syslog format, it converts them into a human-readable name in the
syslogd fashion.
.Pp
It then writes the processed line to stdout.
.Pp
You can emulate the whole syslogd behaviour by combining the following
components:
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
A Unix stream super-server such as
.Xr s6-ipcserver 8
listening to the Unix domain socket
.Pa /dev/log ,
to connect to the kernel log-reading interface.
.It
.Nm
running under that super-server, to read the logs and perform adequate
transformations.
.It
A logger such as
.Xr s6-log 8
to store the logs into the filesystem.
.It
A supervision mechanism such as s6, to ensure ease of use and
reliability of the whole chain.
.El
.Pp
The resulting suite of programs is still smaller, and way more
reliable, than a standard syslogd.
.Pp
In the
.Pa examples/syslogd-linux
subdirectory of the s6 package, you will find a suitable ucspilogd
.Xr s6-service-directory 7 .
The run scripts are written in the execline[1] language.
.Pp
.Sy Using ucspilogd as a klogd replacement
.Pp
Certain Unix kernels offer a nice interface to the kernel logs.
For instance, the Linux kernel provides the
.Pa /proc/kmsg
fake file, that can be opened and read like a normal file, excepts
that it gives the kernel logs when they are available and blocks
otherwise.
You can use
.Nm
to process data from those interfaces.
.Pp
The
.Pa examples/klogd-linux
subdirectory of the s6 package is an
.Xr s6-service-directory 7
providing such a klogd service for Linux, using the
.Pa /proc/kmsg
interface.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl d Ar undef
When a variable
.Ar var
given on the command line is actually undefined at
.Nm
execution time, print
.Ar undef
in place of what would be the variable's value on every line.
Default is the string
.Ql <undefined> .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr s6-log 8
.Pp
[1]
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/execline/
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/s6/ucspilogd.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
